=== COGITO CONTEXT UPLOAD ===
Timestamp: 2025-05-26_08-52-33

PDF Processing Log - 2025-05-26 08:52:33
================================================================================

File: vaningenschenau1985.pdf
Size: 601.34 KB
Token Count: 4963
Processed At: 2025-05-26T08:52:28.012984
----------------------------------------
Cleaned Content:
THE CONTROL OF SPEED IN ELITE FEMALE SPEED 
SKATERS 
G. J. VAN INGEN SCHENAU, G. DE GROOT and R. W. DE BOER 
Interfaculty of Physical Education, Free University. Amsterdam 
Abstract-From ten participants in the World Championships Speed Skating for Ladies 1963 a number of 
selected mechanical parameters were measured and correlated with speed and external power. The 
parameters were derived by means of video and film analysis of strokes at the four distances: 500 m. I500 m. 
3GQO m and 5oo O m. The results show that these speed skaters control the different speeds at different 
distances mainly by changing their stroke frequency and not by changing the amount of work per stroke. 
However, at the same distance the relatively small interindividual differences in performance level appeared 
not to be correlated to differences in stroke frequency but were correlated to differences in push-ot f 
mechanics. Better performers gain some potential energy during the gliding phase and show a more 
horizontally directed push-off in the frontal plane. Maximal knee extension velocity did not show any 
correlation with performance. The fact that this might beconnected to theabsence ofa plantar Rexion during 
push-off is discussed. 
INTRODUCTION 
Performance in speed skating is closely related to that 
part of external power P, delivered by the athlete 
which can be used to overcome air and ice friction 
(Ingen Schenau, 1982). In most endurance sports, 
external power is equal to the product of the amount of 
external work per cycle (or per stroke) A and the cycle 
frequency (or stroke frequency)/: If, in speed skating, 
the internal losses (e.g. due to variations in rotational 
kinetic energy of the upper and lower legs in particular) 
are neglected, this product is, at steady speed, ap- 
proximately equal to the power which is used to 
overcome air and ice friction. As shown in a previous 
study, this work per stroke (A) istlelivered by extension 
of the hip and knee (Ingen Schenau and Bakker, 1980). 
In that study, the work per stroke A was calculated 
from the angle CO,,) between upper and lower leg just 
before the onset of the explosive extension of the knee. 
This angle was called the pre-extension knee angle . It 
was shown that speed skaters have smaller pre- 
extension knee angles at shorter distances (higher 
speeds) and that at the same distance elite male speed 
skaters show smaller B,, values than both elite female 
speed skaters and male skaters of lower performance 
level (Ingen Schenau and Bakker, 1980; Ingen Schenau 
and de Groot, 1983b; Ingen Schenau er al., 1983). 
Based on these results it was concluded that a low 0, is 
an important pre-requisite for speed skating. 
However, when comparing the relatively small dif- 
ferences in speed that exist among skaters of about the 
same performance level, no significant correlation 
between 0, and A, external power or speed could be 
shown. This, in spite of the fact that within a group of 
skaters of about the same performance level (for 
example the best ten or fifteen participants of a World 
Recriced IO August 1983; in revised form 28 August 1984. Championship) rather large differences in U, are seen. 
The same is true with respect to stroke frequency: 
within a group ofskaters of the same performance level 
a significant correlation between performance and 
stroke frequency was never found. 
With respect to the control of speed, two different 
questions can be distinguished: 
1. Which parameters determine the rather small 
differences in speed (and thus in performance) between 
subjects at the same distance. 
2. How do speed skaters regulate their rather large 
differences in speed at different distances. 
The purpose of this study was to investigate these 
two questions. 
SOME STROKE MECHASICS 
As can be learned from studies on running (Williams 
and Cavanagh, 1983), it would be extremely difficult to 
develop a reliable three-dimensional model of the 
push-off mechanics in speed skating. This is one of the 
reasons why a segments model was not used. The 
parameters which are used were selected mainly on the 
basis of the dynamics of the body centre of gravity (cg). 
A second reason for the relatively rough approach used 
is that, for the evaluation of the technique of large 
groups of skaters, it would be convenient to find some 
important mechanical parameters which can be de- 
rived from movement registrations with the help of 
only one camera. 
As discussed before, the push-off force F on the 
skate (Fig. 1) lies in a plane (z-x-plane) perpendicular 
to the gliding direction ) of the push-off skate, and is 
more or less directed to the centre of gravity of the 
skater (Ingen Schenau and Bakker, 1980). The oppos- 
ing forces (air and ice friction) are directed almost 
perpendicular to this z-x-plane. The result of the push- 
off in terms of useful work output can be regarded as 
91 

--- Page 1 ---

G. J. VAN INGEN SCHENAU, G. DE GROOT and R. W. DE BOER 
Fig. I. The push-08 force F lies in a z-x-plane perpendicular 
to the gliding direction ) . 
an increase of kinetic energy due to a horizontal 
velocity increment AC, of the centre of gravity (cg) with 
respect to the blade of the push-off skate in the x- 
direction: if the cg has an initial horizontal velocity u Y 
and if it has no initial velocity in x-direction, the 
resultant horizontal velocity at the end of push-off is 
approximately equal to 
c= &j-T@ 
since Au, is directed at right angles to the direction of 
c,.. The increase in kinetic energy associated with the 
mass center s horizontal motion (due to the push-off) 
is thus equal to the useful external work A, where A 
= 1/2mv* - 1/2mvf, and this is approximately equal 
to 1/2m (Au,) assuming a constant uy during the short 
duration of the push-off (Figs 2 and 4). As the horizon- 
tal component F, of F is the only force in the x- 
direction, this increase in kinetic energy is a function of 
the product Fxu, with u, the velocity difference in x- 
direction between the cg and the point of application 
of F during push-off since 
A= h Xu,dr = /rniu,dr 
s AC, 
= mc,du, = im Au I 
0 
with m being the mass of the skater. 
It is clear that this lateral component F, of the push- 
off F determines the amount of (useful) work l/2 m Au: 
done. 
The total instantaneous power output during push- 
off with respect to the potential and kineticenergy level 
of the cg is equal to Flu, + Fg,. Although the vertical 
component will not directly contribute to speed, it 
cannot be concluded that the velocity in a vertical 
direction should be minimized in speed skating as was 
assumed in a previous study on push-off mechanics (Ingen Schenau and Bakker, 1980). What actually 
occurs in most skaters is that in the phase just before 
knee and hip extension the skater s cg shows a passive 
falling movement rotating around the y-axis (Fig. 1). 
In this phase, potential energy is converted into kinetic 
energy. So, just before the extension of hip and knee, 
the cg of the skaters can already have some speed in the 
x-direction due to this passive falling movement. The 
potential energy needed for this conversion can be 
gained during the gliding phase. Figure 2 shows a 
previously measured example of the knee angle during 
the gliding phase and the push-off phase. At the 
beginning of the gliding phase (at I = 0 in Fig. 2 which 
is the instant that the other skate is lifted from the ice) 
the knee angle 8, is often much smaller than the pre- 
extension knee angle 0, just before push-off. 
Part of the work done to increase the knee angle 
during the gliding phase can be attributed to the 
amount of work A done during the push-off phase. 
SELECTION OF THE PARAMETERS 
Apart from the main parameters from previous 
studies (B. and / ) the following parameters were 
selected: 
Maximal extension velocity d,ofthe knee. It is likely 
that the maximal angular velocity is a more accurate 
measure of the result of a push-off than the pre- 
extension knee angle. In theory, skaters can skate at 
small 0, values without using the full potentialities of 
these low 0, values during the push-off. 
A measure e called the effectiveness of the push-off, 
defined as e = AB/AC (Fig. 3). This effectiveness is 
approximated with help of the angle 0, of the new 
gliding leg (left leg in Fig. 3). at the end of push off of 
the other leg (right leg in Fig. 3). If, as a first (and 
rough) approximation it is assumed that C represents 
the entire pelvis and, secondly, that F is directed 
according to the direction AC and that F, is directed 
according to AB, one is able to derive an approxima- 
tion for FJF with the help of only one camera placed 
outside the lane perpendicular to it and which is also 
used to determine the knee angles during push-off. 
If the upper and lower leg have approximately the 
same length a then 
BC* = CK*+BK* -ZCK.BK.cos O, 
= 2a2(1 -cos&.) 
0 _____._______ ____. _ ___- _____ __-_ , 
I ! A 
0 
TIIW 
Fig. 2. The knee angle 0 during one stroke. For definitions of 
0,. 0, and 0, see text. 

--- Page 2 ---

The control of speed in elite female speed skaters 93 
/ 
Fig. 3. A simplified model to approximate the effective component of the push-off. The effectiveness 
e = cosa = AB/AC is calculated from Ub, the angle of the new supporting leg at the moment of weight 
transfer to this leg (at I = 0 in Fig. 2). 
On the other hand 
Bc Z = AC2 -AB* = 4a2-AB2 = 2a Z(I -cos&) 
then 
AB = 2a2 (1+ cos 8,) 
The effectiveness e = AB/AC thus equals 
e = Jt(l +cose,). 
The difference 8, - 6, is taken as a measure of the 
gain in potential energy during the gliding phase. 
Based on the opinions of some coaches the following 
parameters were added: 
(a) the ratio /,//, with J the stroke frequency in the 
curves and f, the stroke frequency during the straight 
sections of the rink: the idea being that better skaters 
show a much higher stroke frequency during the 
curved sections than the straight; 
(b) the maximal knee extension angle 8, (Fig. 2): 
since skaters should fully extend their knees but often 
do not do so; 
(c) the angular difference AU = 0, - B, which is 
covered during knee extension (Fig. 2). 
METHODS 
From the participants in the World Championships 
for Ladies 1983 in Karl-Marx-Stadt (DDR) ten skaters 
were pre-selected for this study. During all four 
distances (500 m, 1500 m, 3000 m and 5000 m) these 
skaters were filmed (16 mm, 63 fps) from outside the 
crossing at right angles to the lane at a distance of 
approximately 25 m from the crossing (the crossing is 
the place where the skaters change from the outer to 
the inner lane or vice versa). During the single push-off 
which was filmed per lap the optical axis of the camera was only approximately perpendicular to the planes 
defined by the locations of the hip, knee and ankle of 
both legs. This results in a (stochastic) error in the 
determination of the knee angle 0. Repeated observa- 
tions of the same subjects at the same distance at 
different competitions show that this error in one 
single stroke can be rather large (up to SC, including 
significant changes during the season). At distances 
longer than 500 m the error decreases (< 2 ) if the 
angles are averaged over all filmed laps per distance. 
For the 500 m and 1500 m, every lap was filmed but, 
for time saving reasons (every frame had to be 
analyzed), on the 3000 m every second lap and on the 
5000 m every third lap was filmed. The hip and knee 
angles were determined with the help of a motion 
analyser, coupled to an (Apple) microprocessor. To 
determine the stroke frequencies in the curved and the 
straight sections separately, video recordings of the 
selected subjects were made during all laps. External 
power needed to overcome friction was calculated 
using a model of air and ice friction losses (Ingen 
Schenau, 1982). This model predicts power as a 
function of trunk position, knee angle, body weight, 
body length and speed of cg. Knee angles were 
smoothed and differentiated with respect to time using 
numerical filters (cut off frequency: 12 Hz) following 
Lees (1980). The values for the parameters of different 
laps derived for one distance were averaged per 
subject. All data are applicable to the situations of full 
laps only, assuming a uniform velocity during each lap. 
So the influence of the start on final times is not 
incorporated. 
Pearson s correlation coefficients between external 
power and speed on the one hand and the technical 
parameters on the other hand were derived and tested 
for significance (null hypothesis: correlation coefficient 
r = 0; p c 0.05). 

--- Page 3 ---

94 G. J. VAN INGEN SCHENAU. G. DE GROOT and R. W. DE BOER 
RESULTS 
A typical example of the knee angle and its derivative 
is presented in Fig.4. The knee angle at which the 
angular velocity reaches its peak value is almost the 
same in all skaters at all distances (160.9 + 3.7 ). At t L 
the skate is lifted from the ice. This occurs at, or 
immediately after, the time that 6 reaches its maximal 
value. 
Means and standard deviations for the selected 
parameters are presented in Table 1. From this table 
the shifts in the parameters at different distances and 
thus at different mean speeds can be seen. 
To investigate the origin of differences in perform- 
ance between the skaters, the mean parameters for 
each subject were averaged over the four distances and 
correlated with the averaged speed and power. By this 
averaging procedure an impression of the qualities of 
all-round skaters can be obtained. The correlation 
matrix is presented in Table 2. Note, the absence of a 
significant correlation between the external power P, 
or the speed c and the maximal extension velocity 4, of 
the knee. 
DISCUSSION 
Table 1 shows that the female speed skaters in this 
study regu Iate differences in speed at different dist- 
ances almost entirely by their stroke frequencyf: The 
amounts of work per stroke (calculated from A 
= P,/f) show little differences at different power 
I -- 0 
I 1; 
160 
t outputs. In spite of the lower B0 values at shorter 
distances, A tends to be even lower at higher power 
outputs. The combinations of 4 andffor all subjects at 
all distances are presented in Fig. 5. This figure also 
shows lines of equal power at different combinations 
of A and& Higher power levels appear to be reached by 
higher stroke frequencies and not by higher amounts 
of work per stroke. Figure 5 also shows that in 
contradiction to this type of speed control, there is, at 
each particular distance, a tendency for better skaters 
(higher power outputs) to show a combination of 
higher work per stroke and lower stroke frequency 
than skaters with lower power outputs. This, however, 
is only reflected in the negative non-significant corre- 
lation betweenfand P, in Table 2. A correlation of 0.8 
between A and speed was obtained. This correlation 
however was not presented in Table 2 since A and u 
cannot be regarded as entirely independent (A is 
calculated from PI while Pf is strongly influenced by 0). 
It can be concluded that the speed skaters in this study 
control their speed at different distances mainly by 
changing their stroke frequencies. This type of speed 
regulation was previously suggested for running and 
swimming by Farfel (1977). 
With respect to the control of speed, some more 
remarks can be made. Table 1 shows that the ratiof,/f, 
increases at longer distances. From the separate data of 
/, and f, (not presented) it can be concluded that this is 
due to the fact thatf, is much mote strongly decreased 
at longer distances than /;. This might reflect the 
opinion of some coaches that skaters should accelerate 
\ 
\ 
- 600 
7 VI 
6 L 
- 400 P v 
 S 
- 200 
Fig. 4. A typical example of knee angle and angular velocity against time. At t L the push-off skate is lifted 
from the ice. 

--- Page 4 ---

The control of speed m elite female speed skaters 95 
during the curved and rest during the straight sec- 
tions. Table 2 shows that this idea cannot statistically 
be affirmed by the data from this study. 
The angles 0,. and angular differences A8 and 0, 
-Ob show little variation at different distances. It is 
remarkable that e (connected to 0,). 0, and thus ei, all 
increase at shorter distances while A shows a tendency 
to decrease. A possible reason might be that these 
selected parameters were derived only for the straight 
sections while ri is calculated for the full laps. At the 
shorter distances the stroke frequency in the curves_/; is 
very high (up to XC ). The left leg in particular 
might do less work during the curved than during the 
straight sections. 
Table 2 shows that performance is positively cor- 
related to the increase in distance of the cg from the 
floor during the gliding phase (see 0, -Ob) and to a 
more horizontally directed push-off (e). These results 
can be accounted for in mechanical terms. The absence 
of significant correlations between P/ or c and 0, and 
ee , is, however,, difficult to explain. Such a result does 
not mean that 0, is not important in speed skating. In 
principle, it is possible that all subjects in this study 
show about the same peak extension velocity. The 
(+ 10 %) standard deviations given in Table 1 however 
demonstrate that this is not the case. A more plausible 
reason might be that 4, is not a sufficiently good 
representation of the velocity difference between the 
center of gravity and the blade of the push-off skate. 
Some evidence for this statement can be deduced from 
Fig. 4. This figure shows that the push-off skate is lifted 
from the ice well before the knee is fully extended. This 
means that most of the instantaneous power derived 
during knee extension has to be delivered in the first 
phase of knee extension which is different from the 
situation in jumping, for example, where the instan- 
taneous power output reaches its peak value just 
before maximal knee extension (Gregoire e( ul.. 1984). 
The main reason for this difference is to be found in the 
different function of plantar flexors. 
In speed skating, plantar flexion should be avoided 
(Ingen Schenau and Bakker, 1980) while in jumping, 
the m. gastrocnemius in particular, plays an extremely 
important role in transporting energy from knee 
extension to plantar Hexion (Grtgoire cl al.. 1984). 
Moreover, if plantar flexion occurs, the velocity dif- 
ference between the hip and the sole of the foot can be 
much higher than the velocity differences between hip 
and ankle. In speed skating, the velocity difference 
between the hip and the blade of the skate will be 
approximately equal to the velocity difference between 
hip and ankle. Even at a continuously increasing 
angular velocity, this velocity difference will reach its 
maximal value well before the knee angle reaches 180 . 
It is clear that since this maximal velocity difference 
also reflects the maximal velocity difference between 
the hip and the blade of the skate, the skate has to be 
lifted from the ice at approximately the point of 
highest knee extension velocity. This point can, by the 
use of goniometry, be estimated: 

--- Page 5 ---

96 G. J. VAN INGEN SCHENAU. G. DE GROOT and K. w. DE BOER 
Table 2. Correlation coeficients between speed (c) or power (P,) and the selected parameters. 
Signi Iicant relations are denoted by l (n = IO). All values were averaged over the four distances 
before the correlations were calculated 
L -0.5 0.6 0.1 -0.7 0.4 0.2 0.8 0.1 0.7 0.2 
P/ - 0.3 0.5 0.4 - 0.6 0.1 0.1 0.9. 0.0 0.6 0.2 
t. 1 1 1 , I I 
 IO 1.5 20 25 3.0 35 40 
A IJ kq- 1 
Fig. 5. The combinations of work per stroke and stroke 
frequencies for all subjects at the four distances. The solid 
lines are lines of equal power. 
Let the upper and lower leg lengths both be a and the 
knee angle be 0. Then the distance HA between the hip 
(H) and ankle (A) is 
HA = a J? J(l -COS@. 
The rate at which the distance between H and A 
increases is then 
u = fa J2. ;lsyc~se .e. 
If it is assumed that b isincreasing in time according to 
a linear (for example 0 = 6000 r) or square function 
(for example e = 50000 t ), 0 and u can be calculated 
based on a B. value of 130 (see also Fig. 4). Such 
simulations show that u reaches its maximal value at 
about l50 -154 . A further increase in angular velocity 
during the remaining part of the knee extension will 
not result in a higher velocity difference between hip 
and ankle joint. This might be an important reason 
why 0,, A0 but also d,,, (Table 2) do not show any 
significant correlation with performance (Pf or c). 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
It is concluded that the elite female speed skaters in 
this study control their speed at various distances by means of their mean stroke frequency. For elite males, 
more or less the same interpretation can be deduced 
from previous studies (Ingen Schenau and de Groot, 
1983b). Among these female speed skaters small dif- 
ferences in performance (per distance) however are not 
significantly correlated with differences in stroke 
frequency but with differences in push-off mechanics. 
A small knee angle in the new supporting leg at the 
beginning of the gliding phase seems to be an import- 
ant factor since this small angle reflects an effective 
direction of the push-off. This small angle makes it 
possible for the skaters to do some useful work during 
the gliding phase by increasing their potential energy, 
this can be converted into kinetic energy during the 
first phase of the following push-off. More studies are 
necessary before these last conclusions can be genera- 
lised to other populations of skaters. 
Acknowledyements-The help of Prof. Dr. H. T. A. Whiting 
in preparing the text of this manuscript is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
REFERENCES 
Farfel, W. S. (1977) Bewegungssfeuering im Sport. Sportverlag, 
Berlin. 
Gregoire, L.. Veeger, H. E., Huijing, P. A. and Ingen Schenau, 
G. J. van (1984) The role of mono- and bi-articular muscles 
in explosive movements. Inr. J. Sporf. Med. 5, 299-303. 
lngen Schenau, G. J. van and Bakker, K. (1980) A bio- 
mechanical model of speed skating. J. Hum. Mumt Srud. 6, 
1-18. 
lngen Schenau, G. J. van (1982)The influence ofair friction in 
speed skating. 1. Biomechanics 15, 449458. 
Ingen Schenau, G. J. van, de Groot, G. and Hollander, A. P. 
(1983) Some technical, physiological and anthropometrical 
aspects of speed skating. Eur. J. clppl. Physiol. 50,343-354. 
lngen Schenau. G. J. van and de Groot, G. (1983a) Dil Terences 
between male and female speed skaters during super 
maximal cycling. Eur. J. appl. Physiol. 51, 337-345. 
Ingen Schenau, G. J. van and de Groot, G. (1983b) On the 
origin of differences in Performance level between elite 
male and female speed skaters. Hum. Mumr Sci. 2,151-159. 
Lees, A. (1980) An optimised film analysis method based on 
finite difference techniques. J. Hum. Mvmt Stud. 6, 
165-180. 
Williams, K. R. and Cavanagh, P. R. (1983) A model for the 
calculation of mechanical power during distance running. 
J. Biomechonics 16, 115-128. 

--- Page 6 ---

File: vaningenschenau1987.pdf
Size: 577.04 KB
Token Count: 953
Processed At: 2025-05-26T08:52:28.088535
----------------------------------------
Cleaned Content:
J.Anat.(1987),155,pp.1-5
With2figures
Printedin Great Britain
Theuniqueactionofbi-articular muscles incomplex
movements
G.J.VANINGEN SCHENAU, M.F.BOBBERT
ANDR.H.ROZENDAL
Department of Functional Anatomy, Facultyof Physical Education, Free University,
Amsterdam, P.O.Box7161,1007MCAmsterdam, The Netherlands
(Accepted 16January 1987)
INTRODUCTION
Forunderstanding theco-ordination ofmuscles incomplex movements, itisof
particular interesttoknowthepotential actionsofalltypesofmusclesinvolved. At
presenttheactionofmusclesthatpassovermorethanonejointismainlydescribed
withrespecttomovements inthejointsthatarecrossed(Williams &Warwick, 1980;
Jensen&Schulz,1977;Mac Conaill &Basmajian, 1969).However, Elftman (1939,
1940)hypothesised thatbi-articular musclesmightplayaroleinsavingenergyexpendi-
ture.Thispointhasbeenfurtherelaborated by Gregoire, Veeger,Huijing &Van
Ingen Schenau (1984),whoshowedthattherectusfemorisandgastrocnemius muscles
areusedtotransport energyfromproximal todistaljointsduringjumping. If,for
example, kneeextension isaccompanied byplantarflexionwhilegastrocnemius exerts
alargeforce,powerdelivered bythekneeextensors isusedinpartforplantarflexion
(Gregoire etal.1984).
Recently ithasbeenshownthatinapush-off withoutplantarflexion,asisthecase
inspeedskating,oneisnotabletofullyextendthekneeduringpushoff.Theseresults
madeitalikelyassumption thatbi-articular muscles canplayauniqueroleinthe
transformation ofrotation inthekneejointintothetranslation ofthebodycentreof
gravityinsuchawaythatthiscentreofgravityiscontinuously accelerated duringthe
push-off.
Thepurposeofthisstudywastoshedmorelightonthishypothesis bymeansofan
analysisofaverticaljump.
METHODS
Two-legged counter movement jumpsoftenexperienced jumpers werefilmed(16
mm,100framespersecond)atapproximately rightanglestothesagittalplane.Using
amotionanalyser thepositions ofthefoot(determined bythefifthtarsometatarsal
jointandthetubercalcanei), anklejoint(+1cmanterior totipofthelateral
malleolus), kneejoint(jointgapmeasured atthefibularcollateral ligament) andhip
joint(greatertrochanter) weredetermined. Ground reaction forcesweremeasured by
meansofa Kistlerforceplate.Angles,angularvelocities, netmoments andforceswere
calculated according totheprocedures described by Gregoire etal.(1984).Thecurves
ofthesubjects weresynchronised attheinstantoftake-off. Meancurveswerecalcu-
latedbyaveraging thevaluesofthesubjectsforeachframe.Thevelocitydifference
betweenhipandanklewascalculated directlyfromthecoordinates ofhipandankle.
Electromyography patterns ofvastuslateralis, rectusfemorisandbothheadsof
gastrocnemius wererecorded bysurfaceelectrodes (Beckman). Thesignalswerefull

--- Page 1 ---

2G.J.VANINGEN SCHENAU, M.F.BOBBERT ANDR.H.ROZENDAL
waverectified andlowpassfiltered(cutofffrequency 7-4Hz;slope:6d B/octave).
Meanlevelofelectromyographic activityduringpush-off wasdetermined. Theresult-
antsignalwasexpressed asapercentage ofthismeanlevelinordertocalculate a
meancurveofelectromyographic activityforallsubjects.
RESULTS
Themeanactivitypatternofvastuslateralisandofbothheadsofgastrocnemius are
presented in Figure1.Theactivitypatternofrectusfemorisisnotpresented sinceit
resembles thepatternofvastuslateralis toalargeextent.Patterns aredrawnforthe
push-off phaseonly.Theonsetofthisphaseisdefinedasthetimefromwhichthe
velocityofthebodycentreofgravityispositive. Figure1alsoshowsthevelocity
differences VHAbetween hipandankle,VIbetween ankleandgroundand VHG=VHA
+VAGbetween hipandground.Thevelocitydifference VHAreachesitsmaximum value
atameankneeangleof132 .Thecurvesshowthatthevelocitydifference VAGwhich
ismainlyduetoplantarflexion,issuddenly increased atabout70mspreceding lift-
off.Thetimingofthisincrease of VAGissuchthatthevelocitydifference between hip
andgroundcancontinue toincrease despitethedecrease of VHA.
DISCUSSION
Themaximal velocitydifference betweenhipandankleappears tobereached ata
meankneeangleof1320.Thisisanimportant phenomenon whichisduetotwo
constraints:
(a)Ithasbeenarguedbefore(Ingen Schenau, de Boer&de Groot,1985)thatitis
essentially impossible tomaintain apositiveacceleration of VHAUPtofullextension.
Ifthekneeapproaches fullextention, VHAwillfalltozeroindependently oftheknee
extension velocity. Thehipcanthennolongerberemoved fromtheankle.The
transformation ofkneeangularvelocityintothetranslational velocitydifference VHA
islesseffective thelargerthekneeangle.Thisconstraint canbedescribed bysimple
goniometry (Ingen Schenau etal.1985)andiscalledageometrical constraint.
(b)Topreventhyperextension oftheknee,theactualkneeangularvelocityhasto
bedecelerated tozerovelocity atfullextension. Thiscanbedescribed asananatomical
constraint.
Ifthisexplosive push-off weretohavebeenperformed withoutplantarflexion,the
endofthepush-off wouldfallatthekneeangleatwhich VHAreachesitspeakvalue.
Atthatinstantthelargerbodysegments, whichhaveachieved avelocitywithrespect
totheground,wouldpullthesmallersegments fromtheground.Thiswouldmean
thatthekneeextensors wouldbeabletoshorten overalimitedrangeonly.Themean
angleofdeepestkneeflexionattheonsetofpush-off was820.Fromthetotalpossible
extension rangeof980(from82to1800),only500wouldthenbeusedtoaccelerate the
position ofthehip.However, becauseofafastplantarflexion(meanpeakvalue:
15rads-1)thehipcanbeaccelerated upto25msbeforelift-off.Thisplantarflexion
appears tobereinforced byactivation ofgastrocnemius. Figure1showsatimeinterval
between theincreaseofactivation ofthegastrocnemius andtheincreaseof VAG.This
phaselagwillmainlybecausedbyanelectro-mechanical delayof30-50ms(Komi,
1979)andbythecatapult-like actionofthetendocalcaneus (Achilles tendon)
(Alexander &Bennet Clark,1977;Hof,Geelen&vanden Berg,1983;Bobbert,
Huijing &van Ingen Schenau, 1986a-c). Giventhegeometrical andanatomical

--- Page 2 ---

Bi-articular muscles
---vastuslateralis
gastrocnemius %
100
emg
VHA+VAG
' ~~2
11Velocity
-300 -200 -100 ms
time
Fig.1.Electromyographic patterns ofthevastuslateralismuscleandmeanofbothheadsofthe
gastrocnemius. Velocity differences VHAbetweenhipandanklejoint,VAGbetween anklejointand
groundand VHA+VAG.Timeisexpressed inmspreceding lift-off.Itshouldbenotedthatadifference
of30%inpeakvelocitybetween VHAand VHA+VAGcorresponds toadifference inworkoutputof
approximately 70%.
constraints itseemsobvious thattheactionofthegastrocnemius ismeanttocom-
pensatefortheinevitable decrease of VHAattheendofthepush-off. Sincetheangular
velocityinthekneejointhastobedecelerated tozerotoavoidover-extension ofthe
knee,thebi-articular gastrocnemius muscleplaysauniqueroleinthelastphaseof
thepush-off. Itopposeskneeextension andreinforces plantarflexion.Ifonlymono-
articular muscleswereinvolved, acontinuing contraction ofthekneeextensors would
beuseless.Powerwouldbedissipated intoheatinanecessary eccentric contraction of
amono-articular kneeflexor.Moreover plantarflexionwouldhavetobeperformed
byplantarflexorsonly,atahighcontraction velocity. Thebi-articular muscle
gastrocnemius, however, allowsthekneeextensors tocontinue tocontract anddeliver
power.Thispowerisnotusedforfurtherincrease of VHA,butisusedforplantar
flexion:thekneeextensors pullonthecalcaneus asaresultoftheactionofthe
gastrocnemius.
Itwasreportedpreviously (Gregoire etal.1984)thatrectusfemorisalsocontributes
toaproximodistal energytransport. Interpreted intermsoftheconstraints described
hereconcerning thetransformation ofrotations injointsintotranslation ofthecentre
ofgravity,thesignificance ofthistransport mechanism becomesconvincing.
Figure2showsaschematic representation ofthemusclesinvestigated. Thejumpis3

--- Page 3 ---

4G.J.VANINGEN SCHENAU, M.F.BOBBERT ANDR.H.ROZENDAL
Fig.2.Schematic representation ofmuscles(andmusclegroups)whichareknowntocontribute to
thehighmeanpoweroutputof2000-3000 wattsperanklefoundinplantarflexionduringjumping.
Themono-articular musclegluteusmaximus (1)andthevastimuscles(3)candeliverpoweruntilthe
endofpush-offsincetheopposing effectsoftherectusfemoris(2)andthegastrocnemius (4)arelarge
enoughtoresultinnetflexingtorqueswhichdecelerate theangularvelocities ofthehipandknee
extension respectively.
initiated byanacceleration ofthe(relatively heavy)trunkasaresultofactivation of
gluteusmaximus andduetoashortintensive burstofactivityofthehamstrings
(Gregoire etal.1984).Thetermination ofthehamstring activityallowstheknee
extensors toextendthekneejoint.Becauseofthegeometrical constraint theeffectof
theangularvelocityofthetrunkonthevelocityofthecentreofgravitydecreases.
Furtheracceleration ofthisangularvelocitybygluteusmaximus isopposedbyrectus
femoris. Asaconsequence gluteusmaximus cancontinue todeliverpowersincethis
powerisusedforkneeextension andplantarflexionbythetendinous actionsofboth
rectusfemorisandgastrocnemius. Atpresentthismechanism canonlybedescribed
qualitatively onthebasisofactivitylevelandcontraction velocities ofmusclesandon
thebasisofnetforce,torqueandpower-time histories inthejointsmeasured using
methods previously described (Gregoire etal.1984).Nevertheless itcanbeconcluded
that(atleast)allmusclesindicated in Figure2contribute tothehighpoweroutput(up
to2000-3000 wattsperankle)foundduringplantarflexioninthelastphaseofthe
push-off. Thisoptimal useofthecapabilities ofallthesemuscleswouldbeimpossible
ifmanhadmono-articular musclesonly.Thegeneralcharacter oftheconstraints
discussed forhumanskatingandjumping makesitmostlikelythatthislastconclusion
isalsotrueforotherrunning,jumping andhoppingorganisms. Hopping andrunning
alsoshowasimultaneous kneeextension andplantarflexion(Winter,1983).Moreover,
itcanbededucedfromstudiesonlocomotion ofcatsthatkneeandankleangleshave
amoreorlesssimilarpatternduringpush-off ingalloping andtrotting asthepatterns
showninthepresentpaper(Engberg &Lundberg, 1969;Wetzel Atwater &Stuart,
1976).Eveninthewalking ofcatsdeceleration ofthekneeangleattheendofthe
stancephaseappears tobecompensated byplantarflexionsincethedistancebetween
hipandtoeiscontinuously increased (Wetzel etal.1976).

--- Page 4 ---

Bi-articular muscles 5
Itisconcluded thatbi-articular muscles haveauniquefunction inthetrans-
formation ofrotations injointstotranslation ofthebody.
SUMMARY
Actionsofmusclesthatpassovermorethanonejointaremainlydescribed with
respecttomovements inthejointsthatarecrossed. Inaprevious studyofpush-off
withoutplantarflexionitwasshownthatthetransformation ofkneeangularvelocity
intotranslation ofthebodyisconstrained bythefactthatvelocitydifference between
hipandanklehastoreachitspeakvaluealongtimebeforethekneeisextended. The
presentstudywasmeanttotestthehypothesis thattheactionofthegastrocnemius can
beunderstood inthelightofthisconstraint.
Vertical jumpsoftensubjects wereanalysed cinematographically. Electro-
myographic signalswerederivedfromkneeextensors andplantarflexorssimul-
taneously. Theresultsshowthatthepeakvelocitydifference betweenhipandankleis
reachedatameankneeangleof1320.Atthatinstantarapidplantarflexionstarts,
reinforced byastrongincreaseofactivation ofgastrocnemius. Itissuggested thatthe
bi-articular character ofthegastrocnemius muscleenablesthekneeextensors to
continue todeliverworkwhichistransported totheanklewhereitisusedforplantar
flexion.Thisoptimaluseofthecapabilities ofproximally locatedmuscleswouldnot
bepossible ifmanhadmono-articular musclesonly.
REFERENCES
ALEx ANDER, R.Mc.N.&BENNETCLARK,H.C.(1977).Storageofelasticstrainenergyinmuscleandother
tissues.Nature265,114-117.
BOBBERT, M.F.,Huui NG, P.A.,VANINGENSCHENAU, G.J.&Worrrmz, R.D.(1986).Poweroutputofhuman
tricepssuraemuscle-tendon complexduringjumping. Journalof Physiology 366,78P.
BOBBERT, M.F.,HUUING, P.A.&VANINGENSCHENAU, G.J.(1986).Amodelofhumantricepssurae
muscle-tendon complex appliedtojumping. Journalof Biomechanics 11,887-898.
BOBBERT, M.F.,Huu ING, P.A.&VANINGENSc HENAU, G.J.(1986).Anestimation ofpoweroutputandwork
donebyhumantricepssuraemuscle-tendon complex injumping. Journalof Biomechanics 11,899-906.
ELFTMAN, H.(1939).Thefunction ofmusclesinlocomotion. American Journalof Physiology 125,339-356.
ELFr MAN, H.(1940).Theworkdonebymusclesinrunning. American Journalof Physiology 129,672-684.
ENGBERG, I.&LUNDBERG, A.(1969).Anelectromyographic analysisofmuscular activityinthehindlimb of
thecatduringunrestrained locomotion. Actaphysiologica scandinavica 75,614-630.
GREGom E, L.,VEEGER, H.E.,Huu ING, P.A.&VANINGENSCHENAU, G.J.(1984).Roleofmono-andbi-
articular musclesinexplosive movements. International Journalof Sports Medicine 5,301-305.
HOF,A.L.,GEELEN, B.A.&VANDENBERG,J.W.(1983).Calfmusclemoment, workandefficiency inlevel
walking; roleofserieselasticity. Journalof Biomechanics 16,523-537.
INGENSCHENAU, G.J.VAN,DEBOER,R.W.&DEGROOT,G.(1985).Thecontrolofspeedinelitefemalespeed
skaters.Journalof Biomechanics 18,91-96.
JENs EN,C.R.&SCHULTZ, G.W.(1977).Applied Kinesiology. New York:Mc Graw-Hill.
Kob I,P.V.(1979).Neuromuscular performance: factorsinfluencing forceandspeedproduction. Scandinavian
Journalof Sports Sciences 1,2-15.
MACCONAILL, M.A.&BASMAJIAN, J.V.(1969).Muscles and Movements. Baltimore: Williams &Wilkins.
WETz EL, M.C.,ATWATER, A.E.&STUART, D.G.(1976).Movements ofthehindlimb duringlocomotion of
thecat.In Neural Controlof Locomotion (ed.R.M.Herman, S.Grillner, P.S.G.Stein&D.G.Stuart).
New York:Plenum Press.
WILLIAMS, P.L.&WARWICK, R.(1980).Gray's Anatomy. London: Churchill Livingstone.
WINTER, D.A.(1983).Moments offorceandmechanical powerinjogging. Journalof Biomechanics 16,
91-97.

--- Page 5 ---

File: vaningenschenau1989.pdf
Size: 2287.50 KB
Token Count: 16797
Processed At: 2025-05-26T08:52:28.545878
----------------------------------------
Cleaned Content:
Human Movement Science 8 (1989) 301-337 
North-Holland 301 
TARGET ARTICLE 
FROM ROTATION TO TRANSLATION: CONSTRAINTS 
ON MULTI-JOINT MOVEMENTS AND THE UNIQUE ACTION 
OF BI-ARTICULAR MUSCLES * 
Gerrit Jan VAN INGEN SCHENAU 
Free Untoersity, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Van Ingen Schenau, G.J., 1989. From rotation to translation: Con- 
straints on multi-joint movements and the unique action of bi-articular 
muscles (Target article). Human Movement Science 8, 301-337. 
Human joints, predominantly, allow rotations to occur. As a consequence, translations of the 
body centre of gravity or translations of a distal segment relative to the trunk are the result of 
transformations of rotations in joints into the desired translations. This leads to a number of 
constraints associated with these transformations which depend on the mechanically formulated 
task demands. Experimental kinematic and kinetic data on jumping and cycling show that the 
temporally ordered sequence in timing of leg muscle activation patterns as well as co-activation of 
mono-articular hip and knee extensor muscles and their bi-articular antagonists are in concert 
with these constraints. Bi-articular muscles transport the mechanical output of mono-articular 
muscles to joints where it can effectively contribute to the desired aim of the movement. The 
universal nature of the constraints is illustrated and some possible consequences for the control of 
movement are discussed. 
1. Introduction 
The subject of the control of human movement is of central interest 
to researchers from a variety of disciplines. On different levels of 
observation neurophysiologists, neuroanatomists, psychologists, biolo- 
* The author likes to express his gratitude to Dr. C.C.A.M. Gielen, Dr. R.H. Rozendal and Dr. 
H.T.A. Whiting for their helpful comments on this manuscript. 
The concepts discussed in this article are to a large extent based on work performed by or in 
cooperation with graduate students (Dr. M.F. Bobbert, Dr. R.W. de Boer and Drs. J.J. de Koning) 
and undergraduate students (P.J.M. Boots, R.J. Snackers and W.W.L.M. van Woensel). 
Author s address G.J. van Ingen Schenau, Dept. of Functional Anatomy, Faculty of Human 
Movement Sciences, Free University, Van der Boechorststraat 9, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. 
0167.9457/89/$3.50 0 1989, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. (North-Holland) 

--- Page 1 ---

302 G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotatmn to translation 
gists and biophysicists attempt to unravel the mysteries of movement 
control. A major challenge for many of these scientists is to explain 
how an extremely complex system can become organized to produce 
coherent and functionally effective behavior (e.g. Whiting 1984; 
Bingham 1988). 
To a certain extent many such studies can be qualified as a search 
for the constraints necessary to master Bernstein s (1967) problem of 
how to bring the large (and often redundant) number of degrees of 
freedom in the human action system under control. Much of the 
research in this respect has been focussed on neurally based constraints 
including, for example, the research into the architecture and behavior 
of neuronal networks, hypotheses about control strategies or functional 
synergies necessary to minimize neural calculations, and possible rela- 
tionships between afferent and efferent signals or a mixture of these 
signals (e.g. Feldman 1980a, b, 1986; Vincken and Denier van der Gon 
1985; Grillner and Wallen 1985; Perret and Cabelguen 1980; Berkinblit 
et al. 1986; Hopfield 1982, 1984; De Luca 1988; Coolen and Gielen 
1988; Bizzi et al. 1982, 1986; Mussa-Ivaldi et al. 1985; Flash 1987; 
Enoka 1983; Pedotti et al. 1978; Hogan 1985; Flash and Hogan 1985; 
Crowninshield and Brand 1981; Dul et al. 1984a, b; Lee 1984; Jongen 
et al. in press; Gielen and Coolen in press; Bullock and Grossberg 
1988). Many of these authors explain the behavioral variability of 
innate and voluntary movements to be a result of the tuning of neurally 
based programmes or networks by extero or proprioceptive informa- 
tion. Others, however, appear to be primarily focussed on constraints 
which may emerge from the interaction between the actor and his 
environment (e.g. Reed 1982; Kelso and Tuller 1980, 1984; Fowler and 
Turvey 1978; Turvey and Kugler 1984; Kelso and Schoner 1988). These 
interactions (or relations) not only include a strong perception-action 
coupling (e.g. Reed 1982; Warren 1984; Bootsma 1988) but also the 
dynamics of the system itself. The tools used to describe these dy- 
namics are based on a physical theory of the spontaneous formation of 
structure in highly complex systems (e.g. Kelso and Schoner 1988). It is 
argued that not all constraints which emerge spontaneously in the 
relation between actor and environment can be predicted by means of 
extrapolations from system components whose properties mostly are 
measured in isolation. Though at present the language of these tools 
(non-linear dynamics) is on a rather abstract level (e.g. Beek and Beek 
1988) the experimental examples provided stress the necessity for 

--- Page 2 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translation 303 
 top-down studies of functionally constrained behavior (Munhall 1986; 
Bingham 1988): the whole is more than the sum of parts (Agarwal 
and Gottlieb 1986). 
Given the fact that Bernstein (1967) early on had stressed the 
influence of external, gravitational and inertial forces on movement 
kinematics, it is surprising that relatively few attempts have been made 
using a biomechanical approach to deduce relations between the mech- 
anical goal of a multi-joint movement, the movement kinematics and 
the underlying driving forces, as proposed by Elftman (1939a, b) and 
applied by, for example, Winter (1984) and Enoka (1983). This is 
probably due to the rather hypothetical nature of the concept of the net 
joint forces, moments and power which result from such an analysis of 
linked segments using inverse dynamics. Illustrated by examples of two 
different actions (jumping and cycling), it will be shown how such 
 top-down studies have contributed to the discovery of (universal) 
constraints which reduce the number of redundant degrees of freedom 
in the extremities. The main aim of this paper is to clarify those 
constraints which are associated with the transformation of rotations in 
joints into the desired translation of the body centre of gravity or into 
the desired translation of a distal segment (foot, hand) or object. The 
unique and indispensable action of bi-articular muscles in solving the 
problems associated with these constraints will be explained. In the 
examples it will be shown that the observed temporally ordered se- 
quence of activation patterns of mono- and bi-articular muscles ap- 
pears to be highly functional in the light of the constraints and the 
specific task demands. Although this functional relationship is descrip- 
tive rather than explanatory the observed phenomena will be shown to 
allow a critical discussion of some existing theories on control strate- 
gies. 
2. The biomechanical tools 
The constraints which are to be discussed in this article were 
discovered in movement analyses of jumping, skating and cycling. The 
methodologies used were the same in all cases and were based on 
inverse Newtonian mechanics using a model consisting of linked rigid 
segments (foot, lower leg, upper leg and rest of the body). The 
movements of skilled subjects were filmed with a 16 mm high speed 
camera operating at 67 frames per second during the analysis of cycling 

--- Page 3 ---

304 G.J. otin Ingen Schennu / From rotation to translation 
and 100 fps during skating and jumping. The camera was placed at 
right angles to the (sagittal) plane of motion. Two-dimensional coordi- 
nates of landmarks placed on anatomical positions and on force plate, 
skate, pedal etc. were obtained with the help of a motion analyser. 
Simultaneously, magnitude, direction and point of force application of 
reactive forces on the foot were measured by force plate or by specially 
developed force transducers in pedal or skate. The number of muscles 
from which electromyograms (EMG s) were obtained differed between 
the three studies. However, all analyses included the EMG s of semi- 
tendinosus, gluteus maximus, rectus femoris, vastus medialis, gastro- 
cnemius (medial head) and soleus. After high pass filtering (5 Hz, to 
remove movement artefacts), the raw EMG s were full wave rectified, 
sampled and low pass filtered. In the original studies we were mainly 
interested in temporally ordered changes in activation level. For this 
reason the EMG s were normalized to the maximum value attained 
during a movement (push-off or cycle) which of course obscures 
eventual differences in EMG-amplitude between the different move- 
ments. Film, force and EMG data were synchronized using flashing 
lights (for the film) and pulses on force and EMG records. 
For the interpretation of the EMG data presented in this and in the 
previous studies one should take into account the phase lag between a 
change in EMG level and the change in mechanical output of the 
muscle, usually referred to as the electro-mechanical delay (EMD). 
Most studies on the magnitude of this EMD have been focussed on the 
time delay between the onset of EMG and the onset of muscle force 
(see Bell and Jacobs (1986) for references) mainly for muscles crossing 
the elbow joint. Particulary for cycling, not only the phase shift during 
the increase of activity but also the phase shift during the decrease in 
activity should be taken into account. In order to achieve a global 
measure for the total phase shift between EMG and force signals, we 
calculated the cross-correlation function between the EMG level of the 
vastus medialis (derived in the same way as indicated above) and the 
(simultaneously) measured knee extensor moment in repeated submaxi- 
mal (mono articular) static knee extensions (approximately one con- 
traction per second). The global measure for the EMD thus derived 
yielded a mean value in the order of magnitude of 90 ms (mean of five 
subjects). 
Segmental parameters (centres of gravity, moments of inertia) were 
estimated on the basis of data from Dempster (1955) and Clauser et al. 

--- Page 4 ---

G.J. c;an Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translation 305 
(1969) and the actual segment lengths and body weights of the subjects. 
Translational and rotational velocities and accelerations were obtained 
by differentiation of position data. By successive application of Newto- 
nian equations of motion on foot, lower leg and upper leg, net joint 
forces and moments in ankle, knee and hip were calculated. Joint 
powers were calculated as the product of joint moment and angular 
velocity. Muscle shortening velocities were calculated from (total) 
muscle lengths. These muscle lengths as a function of angles in the 
joint(s) that are crossed were obtained on the basis of cadaver studies 
(Hoogkamer et al. in prep.) using a method as published by Grieve et 
al. (1978). The EMG, kinematic and kinetic data were first averaged 
per subject (5-10 jumps or cycles) and subsequently averaged over the 
subjects. For the sake of readability, the results presented here will be 
limited to those which are necessary to clarify the constraints. For a 
complete overview of the results and for more detailed information 
concerning the methods used the reader is referred to our original 
papers on jumping (Gregoire et al. 1984; Van Ingen Schenau et al. 
1987a; Bobbert and Van Ingen Schenau 1988) skating (Van Ingen 
Schenau et al. 1985b; De Koning 1988) and cycling (Boots et al. under 
review; Van Ingen Schenau et al. under review). It should be noted that 
the aim of the original studies gradually shifted towards an interpreta- 
tion of the time sequence observed in the kinematic and EMG patterns. 
Originally we were mainly focussed on large differences in mechanical 
output in the joints observed when jumping is compared to mono-artic- 
ular exercises (Van Ingen Schenau et al. 1985a; Bobbert 1988) and later 
to the paradoxical co-activation of antagonists that occur both in 
jumping and in cycling and to the question why speed skaters do not 
fully extend their knees (Van Ingen Schenau et al. 1985b). 
Though this background may have some influence on the terminol- 
ogy used in the present article, the examples presented below will be 
discussed on the basis of present insight into the universal nature of the 
constraints isolated. Part of the deeper understanding of the constraint 
found in cycling was actually not obtained until the writing of this 
target article. 
3. The vertical jump 
In the jumping experiments, the jumpers were asked to perform 
two-legged jumps with prepatory counter movements while keeping the 

--- Page 5 ---

306 G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotutmn to translution 
hands on their hips (Bobbert and Van Ingen Schenau 1988). Subjects 
were encouraged to jump as high as possible. As also reported in 
previous studies (e.g. Gregoire et al. 1984), push-off (defined as the 
phase in which the body centre of gravity is accelerated in a vertical 
direction) begins with the extension of the hip joint at approximately 
300 ms preceding toe-off followed by knee extension starting at ap- 
proximately 200 ms before toe-off and finally followed by an explosive 
plantar flexion which starts at about 100 ms prior to toe-off. A 
comparable proximo-distal sequence in joint rotations has also been 
reported for the upper extremity in overarm throwing (Joris et al. 
1985). The time sequence in the onset of positive joint angular velocity 
appears to be associated with the time sequence in the increases of 
EMG level of the mono-articular muscles crossing the corresponding 
joints (fig. 1). EMG-level of hamstring and gluteus maximus is in- 
creased between -400 and - 300 ms followed by an increase in 
activity of rectus femoris and vastus medialis between - 300 and - 200 
ms while the rate of change of plantar flexor activity is high between 
-200 and -100 ms. It has been argued in textbooks on sport bio- 
mechanics (e.g. Hochmuth 1967) that jumpers should extend their 
joints simultaneously in order to optimize the translational velocity of 
the body centre of gravity (a function of the angular velocities in the 
joints). Though, from a mechanical point of view, this statement sounds 
reasonable, it ignores problems associated with the transformation of 
rotations in joints into the translation of the body centre of gravity. 
The same is true with respect to the statement that the net impulse (as 
determined by gravity and the ground reaction force) has to be opti- 
mized (Watkins 1983). 
For this relatively simple movement it will be shown that an unam- 
biguous criterion can be formulated for the mechanical goal of the 
movement. However, the transfer problems have to be discussed first in 
order to be able to place the temporally ordered sequence of joint 
movements in the light of that mechanical goal which is to be opti- 
mized. 
3. I. From rotations to translations: A geometrical and anatomicu I 
constraint 
Apart from the significant translational movements which are possi- 
ble between upper arm and trunk, most joints mainly allow rotations to 

--- Page 6 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translutron 307 
m biceps fernore ----.- m rectus femorls 
m semhnd!nosus .---....--- 
m. gastrocnemius . 
Fig. 1. Ensemble averages of full-wave rectified and low-pass filtered electromyograms of seven 
leg muscles during the push-off in jumping. Time is expressed relative to the instant of toe-off 
(t = 0). The vertical bars indicate the standard error of the mean (n = 10). Note that the 
mechanical response to a change in EMG level may follow after an electro-mechanical delay of 
85-90 ms. (After Bobbert and lngen Schenau 1988.) 
occur. This means that translations of the body centre of gravity (or 
translations of, for example, a ball accelerated by the hand) are 
predominantly a result of the transformation of rotations in joints into 
these translations. Especially in ballistic movements where the body 
centre of gravity (or a ball etc.) is to be accelerated from a low or zero 

--- Page 7 ---

30x G.J. uan Ingen Schenm / From rotatmn to translation 
Fig. 2. Knee angle 0 during the speed skating stroke. Note that the skate loses contact with the ice 
well before full extension (the continuing extension to 180 o takes place after the skate is lifted 
from the ice). 
velocity to a velocity as high as possible, this transformation is handi- 
capped. This constraint was discovered (by chance) in the speed skating 
push-off (Van Ingen Schenau et al. 1985b). In a film analysis of the 
technique of participants in a world championship, it was observed that 
the skaters lose contact with the ice during push-off well before full 
extension (fig. 2). It appeared to be possible to explain this phenome- 
non with the help of some simple goniometry. 
When projected onto a (moving) sagittal plane, the push-off in speed 
skating is comparable to the push-off in jumping with respect to the 
need to accelerate the body centre of gravity relative to the skate by 
means of an explosive leg extension. In contrast to jumpers, however, 
speed skaters should keep their trunk in a more or less horizontal 
position in order to prevent a strong increase in air frictional losses 
(Van Ingen Schenau 1982). Moreover, speed skaters are taught to 
push-off during the forward glide in order to be able to achieve higher 
velocities (up to 55 km/hour) than would be possible when the 
push-off takes place against a fixed point on the ice. This well known 
gliding technique requires the suppression of a plantar flexion in order 

--- Page 8 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to tramlotion 309 
to prevent the point of the skate scratching through the ice (Van Ingen 
Schenau et al. 1985b). This means that the velocity of the body centre 
of gravity relative to the skate is to a large extent determined by the 
velocity difference Vff A between hip and ankle. This velocity difference 
is not only a function of the angular velocity d8/dt in the knee joint 
but it also depends on the knee angle. In mathematical notation this 
dependency can be deduced by differentiation of the difference in 
position between hip and ankle (HA) to time. HA can be expressed in 
terms of the lengths of upper leg (HK) and lower leg (l&f) and knee 
angle 0 (fig. 2) as follows: 
HA2=HK2+K42-2HK~KA~cos6 0) 
Differentiating with respect to time and rearranging terms: 
V,, = d HA/dt = [ HK. KA . sin B/CHK2 + KA2 - 2HK. KA . cos O] 
.d B/dt. (2) 
The expression placed between brackets determines the transfer of 
angular velocity into the translational velocity V,,. This transfer func- 
tion gradually decreases to zero at 0 = 180 o showing that the transfer 
of angular velocity to the desired translational velocity is less effective 
the more the knee is extended. This transfer function is based on 
simple geometrical laws and is therefore defined as a geometrical 
constraint (Van Ingen Schenau et al. 1987; Bobbert 1988). It will be 
clear that this geometrical constraint is universal in the sense that it is 
present in any (human or animal) movement where a translation is to 
be achieved by means of rotations in joints. In the handicapped 
skating push-off this constraint contributes to an early termination of 
the push-off. This early termination is not only due to the geometrical 
constraint but also to the deceleration of knee extension velocity. As 
illustrated in fig. 3, the knee angular velocity is accelerated from 0 
rad/s in the gliding phase of the stroke to approximately 10 rad/s 
during push-off but is then followed by a strong deceleration to 0 
rad/s at full extension. From an anatomical point of view such a 
deceleration to zero prior to full extension is necessary to prevent a 
damaging hyperextension of the knee. Especially where relatively large 
segments (which may contain considerable amounts of rotational en- 

--- Page 9 ---

310 
VHA 
I 0.5 
0 G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to rransla~ion 
---_e 
.--- . . . &,dt / 
/ 
- "HA / 
/ 
/ 
/ 
I / / / / 
0 180 
I e 
160 
1 d0 
z 
0.05 s 
t 
. 
Fig. 3. Velocity difference (V,,) between hip and ankle during the push off in speed skating. This 
velocity difference is not only determined by the knee angular velocity dt /dt but also by the knee 
angle 6 (see eq. (2)). Note that the d0/dt is decelerated to 0 rad/s prior to full extension. 
ergy) are involved, this need to decelerate the angular velocity has to be 
accomplished by strong antagonistic activity (imagine what would 
happen if the 10 rad/s had to be decelerated by passive structures in 
the knee joint). This necessity for an active deceleration of high angular 
velocities in joints between relatively large body segments will hence- 
forth be referred to as the anatomical constraint (Van Ingen Schenau et 
al. 1987a). 
Fig. 3 shows that VHA as a consequence of these two constraints, 
reaches its peak value far before full extension. As soon as (the vertical 
component of) the derivative of VHA equals the gravitational decelera- 
tion (- 9.82 m/s2), the skater will lose contact with the ice since the 
relatively heavy trunk and contralateral leg which are already accel- 
erated to this peak velocity will pull the light push-off skate from the 
ice. This process is visualized in fig. 4. It will not be difficult to imagine 
that a comparable phenomenon will occur if one tries to throw a ball 

--- Page 10 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translatron 311 
3 c 
Y~l= NAl %=VHA-mn X m3 "HA3 
Fig. 4. The velocity (V,,,) of the trunk (m) of a speed skater relative to the blade of the push-off 
skate is approximately equal to the velocity difference VHA between hip and ankle. Due to the 
geometrical and anatomical constraints VHA reaches its peak value well before the knee is 
extended ( V Ha-max). Shortly after this instant the heavy trunk pulls the push-off skate from the 
ice (V,, > VHA3). 
with a fixed trunk and an immobilized wrist (the ball will leave the 
hand far before full elbow extension). If one is able to mobilize a third 
body segment, as is the case in jumping, the inevitable influence of the 
decrease in velocity V,, can be compensated by a rapid increase in 
velocity difference between ankle and ground (VA,). The velocity 
difference I ,, between hip and ground than equals VAG + VHA. The 
mean curves for these velocity differences are presented in fig. 5. Since 
the jumpers start the push-off at much smaller knee angles than the 
skaters, the peak value of VHA appears to occur already at a mean knee 
angle of 132 . If no plantar flexion occurs, the feet will lose contact 
with the ground soon after this instant and a further acceleration of the 

--- Page 11 ---

312 G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translation 
W.5 
-3 
-2 
-I t HA 
1 I r I 0 
-300 -200 -100 ms 
Fig. 5. In jumping the inevitable decrease in the velocity difference VHA between hip and ankle is 
compensated for by a rapid increase in the velocity difference VA,; between ankle and ground. 
This results is a continuing acceleration of the velocity difference hetween hip and ground (V,,<;), 
hip would no longer be possible. Due to the extremely rapid increase of 
VAc,. the hip is further accelerated. When expressed in terms of the 
increase of kinetic energy of the body centre of gravity on the basis of 
its vertical velocity, it appears that in this last 50-60 ms the kinetic 
energy is increased by more than 50%. In addition to this increase in 
kinetic energy, the potential energy is also further increased in this last 

--- Page 12 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From matron to translation 313 
phase. The sum of both energies - defined as effective energy (Bob- 
bert and Van Ingen Schenau 1988) - is to be regarded as the mechani- 
cal measure which should be optimized when an optimal jumping 
height is to be performed. The amount of effective energy at toe-off 
completely determines the maximal jumping height during the subse- 
quent flight phase. So the question can now be discussed as to how the 
capacity of the leg muscles to do work contributes to the increase in 
this effective energy given the discussed constraints. 
3.2. The co-activation of mono- and bi-articular muscles 
Imagine that the geometrical and anatomical constraints have to be 
overcome by the action and coordination of mono-articular muscles 
only. After a knee angle of 132 has been reached, continuing knee 
extension is no longer opposed by inertial forces since a further 
acceleration of V,, is not possible. A continuing activation of the knee 
extensor muscles would result in a useless (and dangerous) increase of 
rotational energy of upper and lower leg. To prevent hyper-extension, 
the knee extension velocity would have to be decelerated to zero well 
before full extension is reached by deactivation of the knee extensors 
and by eccentric contraction of a mono-articular knee flexor. Rota- 
tional energy would thus be converted into heat and the knee extensors 
would be able to contribute to the effective energy over a limited 
shortening range only (50% of the potential range; Van Ingen Schenau 
et al. 1987, 1988). At approximately the same time, mono-articular 
plantar flexors would have to ensure the required explosive plantar 
flexion. The further increase in effective energy would have to be 
delivered by the plantar flexors only. 
However, nature has provided an extremely effective solution for these 
problems: the bi-articular muscle! Though many authors have stressed 
the fact that bi-articular muscles may couple movements in the joints 
that are crossed (Fick 1879; Lombard 1903; Fenn 1938; Elftman 
1939b; Winter 1984: Hogan 1985; Partridge 1986; Wells 1988), a 
unique and indispensable action of the muscles which cross over more 
than one joint has long remained obscure. When placed in the light of 
the geometrical and anatomical constraints, this action of bi-articular 
muscles can be convincingly explained. At approximately the instant 
that V,, can no longer be accelerated , the gastrocnemius couples knee 
extension to plantar flexion. In this action the gastrocnemius decel- 

--- Page 13 ---

314 G.J. mn Ingen Schenau / From rotarum to trunslution 
a b c 
Fig. 6. The bi-articular gastrocnemius muscle couples knee extension to plantar flexion. A 
continuing knee extension (supported by the knee extensors) now supports plantar flexion since 
the origin of the gastrocnemius (on the upper leg) pulls on the calcaneous. Activation of the 
gastrocnemius in this phase of the jump thus decreases the net joint power in the knee and 
increases the joint power in the ankle. This phenomenon is called a transport of power from knee 
to ankle. 
erates the knee angular velocity (which is necessary due to the anatomi- 
cal constraint) and contributes to plantar flexion, necessary to com- 
pensate for the geometrical constraint which allows no further increase 
in VHA. Although the net moment in the knee can now even become 
negative, the knee extensors can remain active and deliver work. This 
work, however, is not used for the increase of knee extension velocity 
but for plantar flexion since the knee extensors pull on the calcaneus 
via the gastrocnemius (fig 6). In other words: the gastrocnemius allows 
a transport of power from knee to ankle joint. This has to occur 
approximately at the instant that positive joint power liberated at the 
knee can no longer contribute to increase of the effective energy of the 
body centre of gravity. This phenomenon stresses the hypothetical 
nature of the net joint powers: power found during plantar flexion can 
actually be delivered by knee extensor muscles. For jumping this 
transport of power is part of the explanation of the extremely high net 
peak power values found in plantar flexion (up to 2000 Watt per leg). 

--- Page 14 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotuiion to translation 315 
A 
a b c 
Fig. 7. It appeared to be possible to demonstrate the advantages of the power transporting action 
of the gastrocnemius muscle with help of a simple physical model ( Jumping Jack ). A spring 
representing the knee extensors can be loaded with a certain amount of potential energy. By 
adjusting the length of the wire which represents the gastrocnemius, timing of the coupling of 
knee extension to plantar flexion can be simulated. At optional timing the model jumps almost 
twice as high compared to jumps without a coupling between these joints (26 cm versus 14 cm). 
Simulations using models of the muscle-tendon complexes of gastro- 
cnemius and soleus (Bobbert et al. 1986a, b) showed that about 25% of 
the peak power output in plantar flexion is power transported from 
knee to ankle. The contracting calf muscles are responsible for another 
25%. The remaining part appears to be due to recoil of series elastic 
elements of the calf muscles. This catapult-like action (Hof et al. 
1983) of in particular the tendo calcaneus also explains the magnitude 
of the angular velocity necessary to achieve the high VA, (fig. 5). 
It appears to be possible to demonstrate the coupling action of the 
gastrocnemius muscle with the help of a simple physical model of a 
jumper (fig. 7). By means of a vertical rail, the trunk of the model can 
be displaced in a vertical direction only. The mono-articular knee 

--- Page 15 ---

316 G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to trunslatmn 
extensors are represented by a spring which can be loaded with 
potential energy by pushing the trunk downwards. The gastrocnemius 
is represented by a wire, the length of which can be adjusted. This 
gastrocnemius length determines the knee angle at which the further 
knee extension is coupled to plantar flexion. Before the wire becomes 
taut, the jumps performed from one particular position (and a particu- 
lar amount of potential spring energy) are identical. This means that 
differences in length of the wire reflect to a certain extent differences in 
timing of activation of the gastrocnemius muscle in real jumping. Using 
the model it can be demonstrated that this timing has a large 
influence on jumpin g height (Bobbert et al. 1987; Van Ingen Schenau 
and Bobbert 1988). At one particular optimal length of the wire the 
model appears to jump approximately twice as high compared to its 
jumping performance when no coupling between knee extension and 
plantar flexion occurs. At slightly longer or shorter adjustments of the 
wire the jumping performances decrease considerably when compared 
to the jumping performance at optimal wire length. To investigate the 
mechanical background of this influence of timing we performed 
computer simulations with a comparable model with the help of a 
simulation technique based on finite element theories (SPACAR, devel- 
oped at the Technical University of Delft). The simulations showed 
that two opposing effects determine the optimal length adjustment. If 
the coupling between knee extension and plantar flexion occurs too 
early, the model loses contact with the floor before the potential spring 
energy is fully utilized. (The knee is not extended at toe-off.) At 
optimal adjustment more than 90% of the potential spring energy 
appears to be converted into effective energy of the model s body 
centre of gravity. When the coupling between knee and ankle occurs 
later (longer wire lengths), an increasing percentage of spring energy is 
converted into rotational energy of the upper and lower leg and is 
finally converted into heat during the collision in the knee joint at full 
knee extension. 
For the discussion section of this article it may be of interest to note 
that the (computer-)simulations were also performed for different start- 
ing knee angles and for different compliances of the wire. These 
simulations show that optimal timing is influenced by both factors, 
not only in an absolute sense but also with respect to relative timing. 
Though the simulation results with respect to optimal timing of this 
simple model may not and can not be translated to real jumping, they 

--- Page 16 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translutmn 
-330 ms -190ms -5Oms 0 ms 
a b c d 
Fig. 8. Active muscles during four subsequent positions during the push off in jumping (for 
explanation see text). 
do show that there is a mechanical background for the sequence in 
actions. If there were to be no sequence in the onset of hip, knee and 
ankle extension, the jumper would lose contact with the floor well 
before the hip and knee joint are extended. This would mean that the 
shortening capacity of the hip and knee extensors would not fully be 
utilised for the increase in the effective energy of the body centre of 
gravity. With this in mind a more complete discussion of inter-muscu- 
lar coordination in jumping is possible. 
3.3. The temporally ordered sequence in EMG patterns 
With the help of different positions in the jumping push-off as 
presented in fig. 8, the proximo-distal sequence in increase of activity 
of the muscles indicated in fig. 1 can be explained. The acceleration of 
the body centre of gravity in an upwards direction is initiated by the 

--- Page 17 ---

318 G.J. oan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translation 
extension of the trunk (fig. 8a, b). Mono- and bi-articular hip extensors 
support the acceleration of the trunk relative to the hip joints. The 
hamstrings oppose the onset of knee extension. Such an early knee 
extension would cause an inertial force on the trunk which would 
oppose a fast angular acceleration of the relatively heavy trunk. The 
transfer of rotational acceleration of the trunk into the vertical acceler- 
ation of the body centre of gravity (BCG) is constrained by the same 
geometrical phenomena as explained for the knee extension (see Bob- 
bert and Van Ingen Schenau (1988) for details). The transfer function 
is maximal at a horizontal trunk position and gradually decreases to 
zero at vertical trunk position. When this geometrical constraint pre- 
vents a further increase of the BCG on the basis of a continuing in 
trunk angular velocity, the hip extensors can no longer contribute to 
the increase of effective energy of the BCG. Due to a simultaneous 
decrease in activity of the hamstrings and increase in activity of the 
quadriceps muscles, the continuing acceleration of the BCG is further 
assured by the acceleration of the velocity difference V,, between hip 
and ankle (fig. 8~). Note that this knee extension is supported by the 
gluteus maximus through co-activation of this mono-articular hip ex- 
tensor and the bi-articular rectus femoris. Without this co-activation of 
antagonists a continuing activation of the gluteus maximus would not 
contribute to the increase of effective energy of the BCG but to a 
useless increase of rotational energy of the trunk. 
At the onset of knee extension, the transfer of knee angular accelera- 
tion to d &,/dr is relatively large due to the relatively small knee 
angle. However, this transfer decreases with the increasing knee angle 
according to eq. (2). Finally the activity level of the plantar flexors is 
increased to oppose a useless further acceleration of the knee angular 
velocity and to initiate the rapid plantar flexion as discussed above. 
Note that in the final phase of the push-off not only the quadriceps but 
even the gluteus maximus muscle contributes to plantar flexion as a 
result of the proximo-distal power transporting role of rectus femoris 
and gastrocnemius. Though more difficult to imagine, this is even true 
for the bi-articular parts of the hamstrings since it was shown that 
during the entire push-off the hamstrings appear to shorten. This may 
explain why the hamstring activity is decreased but not terminated 
when knee extension starts. At first sight the co-activation of ham- 
strings and rectus femoris may sound paradoxical. It has, however, 
already been demonstrated by Lombard (1903) that such a co-activa- 

--- Page 18 ---

G.J. uan lngen Schenau / From rotation to translation 319 
tion results in hip and knee-extension due to differences in moment 
arm between these muscles at hip and knee joint. At the knee joint the 
moment arm of the rectus femoris is larger than that of the hamstrings 
while the opposite is true at the hip joint. In terms of a segmental 
analysis leading to the hypothetical net joint moments and power, it 
seems as if power is running around between hip joint and knee joint 
due to the power transporting action of both muscles. Due to the 
differences in moment arms, however, the power liberated in the 
hamstrings will predominantly appear as an increase in net power in 
the knee joint as long as the force in the rectus femoris is larger than 
that of the hamstrings (in this context this co-activation of bi-articular 
muscles remains a truly nice paradox). 
It should be noted that a proximo-distal sequence in joint move- 
ments is also demonstrated in throwing (e.g. J&-is et al. 1985). Since the 
constraints discussed for jumping are also present in movements where 
rotations in joints have to result in a translation of a distal segment 
(and object), this sequence is most likely also aimed at the continuation 
of the acceleration of the ball until proximally located contributing 
muscles have utilised their capacity to do work on the distally located 
segments and finally to the ball (J&is et al. 1985). As in plantar flexion 
in jumping, the final action (extension of the wrist) is extremely fast 
(34OO /s), here associated with the fact that the ball has already a high 
velocity at the onset of wrist extension. As is the case with the lower 
extremity, such powerful actions can only be performed by segments 
with relatively small moments of inertia controlled by muscles with 
relatively long tendons in order to utilise the catapult action of tendon 
shortening when the muscle force falls at the end of the action. 
From the above mentioned simulations it was clear that utilisation of 
the work capacity of muscles in ballistic movements requires a se- 
quence in action of the joints. This requirement for increasing exten- 
sion velocities explains why this sequence is directed from relatively 
large proximal segments to the relatively light distal segments (a type of 
inertial constraint). 
3.4. Conclusion 
In conclusion it can be stated that the temporally ordered sequence 
in increase of muscle activation in jumping appears to be associated 
with the need for a proximo-distal sequence in joint rotations necessary 

--- Page 19 ---

320 G.J. van Ingen Schenclu / From rotation to translutlon 
to avoid a premature termination of the push-off. Power liberated in 
mono-articular muscles appears to be transported to joints where it can 
contribute to increase the effective energy of the jumper. The observed 
co-activation of mono-articular agonists and their bi-articular 
antagonists is necessary for this transport of power. The intermuscular 
coordination can thus be explained in terms of an effective utilisation 
of the work capacity of the muscles to an increase in the effective 
energy of the jumper without a waste of mechanical energy in eccentric 
contractions (all muscles indicated in fig. 1 shorten during the push-off). 
From an anatomical point of view it should be noted that the 
existence of bi-articular muscles, a minimum number of three segments 
per extremity, the mass distribution over the segments and within the 
distal segments and the relatively long distal tendons as can be ob- 
served in most running and jumping animals all appear to be highly 
functional elements in order to be able to solve the problems associated 
with the geometrical and anatomical constraints in the transfer of 
rotations in joints into translation of the body. 
4. Cycling 
Although the geometrical constraint as represented by eq. (2) is 
present in any movement where rotations at joints are used to translate 
the body or a (distal) segment in a desired direction, the explanation of 
the temporally ordered sequence in EMG patterns as given above is 
strictly coupled to such a ballistic movement. In many non-ballistic or 
less explosive movements the risk for a premature termination of the 
action is less constraining or even absent. Cycling provides an example 
of such movements. In the range of pedal frequencies normally ob- 
served among cyclists (40-120 rpm), the maximal extension velocities 
in the joints are considerably lower than in jumping. Moreover, they 
appear to increase and subsequently decrease during leg extension and 
at proper saddle height adjustment (Hamley and Thomas 1968; 
Nordeen-Snyder 1977), &he knee is not fully extended. 
Many authors have observed phases of significant co-activation of 
agonists and antagonists during cycling (e.g. Gregor et al. 1985; Suzuki 
et al. 1982; Andrews 1987; Jorge and Hull 1986). This co-activation is 
often judged as uneconomical since the force contribution of these 
muscles is assumed to be cancelled out (Gregor et al. 1985; Suzuki et 
al. 1982). 

--- Page 20 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translution 321 
Using the same approach as described for jumping, it was possible to 
demonstrate that these co-activations are highly functional. Moreover, 
it was shown that the sequential order in EMG patterns again seems to 
be logical in the light of the specific task demands and the realisation 
that leg muscles can predominantly cause rotations at joints (Van Ingen 
Schenau et al. under review; Boots et al. under review). 
4.1. Specific task demands 
A specific constraint for cycling concerns the fixed trajectory of the 
pedal. Cycling performance is determined by the power transferred to 
the pedal. The instantaneous power to the pedal is equal to the inner 
product of the pedal force vector and the velocity vector of the pedal 
which can be expressed as the product of the component of the force 
on the pedal in the direction of this velocity vector and the magnitude 
of this velocity. In other words: the more the force on the pedal is 
directed in the instantaneous direction of the displacement of the 
pedal, the more it can contribute to useful power. With this in mind, it 
appears to be possible to explain the need for co-contractions of mono 
and bi-articular muscles in cycling. 
In fig. 9 EMG patterns of a number of mono and bi-articular 
muscles is compared with the phases where the muscles are allowed to 
shorten. The curves are shown as a function of crank angle (0 is at 
top dead centre) and are means of five experienced subjects (for each 
subject five cycles were analyzed and averaged). The subjects cycled at 
350 Watt and 90 rpm. At this cycle frequency 0.1 second corresponds 
to an angular displacement of 54 . In the original experiments more 
muscles were measured but omitted in fig. 9 for ease of survey. It 
should be noted, however, that the curves of the vastus lateralis were 
almost identical to those of the vastus medialis and that tibialis anterior 
showed significant activity mainly between 270 o and 360 o (the sub- 
jects wore toe-clips). When interpreting fig. 9 one should realise that 
the electro-mechanical delay discussed above corresponds to approxi- 
mately 50 at 90 rpm. If such a phase shift would be incorporated in 
the EMG patterns of the mono-articular muscles in fig. 9, the phases of 
mechanical output would approximately coincide with the phases where 
these muscles are allowed to shorten. In other words the mono-articular 
muscles seem to deliver force primarily during the phases where these 
muscles can contribute to positive power. For the bi-articular rectus 

--- Page 21 ---

322 G.J. oan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to transiatron 
270 - 
90 
Fig. 9. Ensemble averages of electromyograms of six leg muscles during cycling as a function of 
crank angle. Activity of the hamstrings is the mean activity of the ensemble averages of 
semitendinosus and biceps femoris (long head). Solid bars indicate the phases where the muscle 
shortens. Top dead centre is at O . For the interpretation of the activity patterns an elecrro-mech- 
anical delay corresponding to approximately 50 o should be taken into account. 
femoris and hamstrings, such a correspondence is less pronounced 
although it should be noted that during a significant part of the 
downstroke (O -180 ) these muscles are active and shorten thus 
contributing to positive power. As can be seen in fig. 9 the co-activa- 
tion of gluteus maximus and rectus femoris is strong during the first 
part of the down stroke and the co-activation of the mono-articular 
knee extensors and hamstrings is most pronounced during the second 
part (remember the EMD). The functional significance of these phases 
of co-activation of antagonists can be explained in the light of the 
specific task demands in cycling: how to effectively transfer muscle 
power to the rotating pedal. Though the explanation was originally 

--- Page 22 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translation 323 
////i//i/////f 
/z p$F3 
?777//, f ,>I, 
Fig. 10. Relatively small changes in the direction of an external force F require large changes in 
net moments in the knee and hip joints (see text). 
coupled to cycling only (Van Ingen Schenau et al. under review; Boots 
et al. under review), it was realized during the writing of the present 
paper that again this concerns a universal constraint which is present in 
any movement. This constraint is explained with the help of a sim- 
plified example. 
4.2. Again: From rotation to translation or how to direct an external force 
Imagine a subject who s trunk is fixed and supported according to 
fig. 10. Since the influence of gravity is not essential for the explanation 
of this constraint, gravity is ignored in this example. Imagine that the 
subject exerts a force on a force plate (FP in fig. 10) in the direction as 

--- Page 23 ---

324 G.J. uun Ingen Schenau / From rotutron to translation 
indicated in fig. 1Oa. With the help of inverse dynamics it can be shown 
that this has to be performed with a (net) hip extending moment 
41 = l/7, . Fl and a (net) knee extending moment Mk, = lk, . F,. If FP 
were to be displaced in the direction of F, the mono-articular hip and 
knee extensors are able to support such a displacement by doing 
positive work. Due to differences in moment arms at hip and knee as 
indicated above, the bi-articular rectus femoris and hamstrings can also 
contribute to positive work since they both shorten in such a move- 
ment. 
Now imagine that the force has to be directed according to fig. lob. 
This situation can only exist with a hip flexing moment Mh2 = l,, . F2 
and a knee extending moment Mk2 = l,, . F2. Note that for the same 
magnitude of external force F the net knee moment has to be consider- 
ably larger than in the situation of fig. 10a. If we again imagine that FP 
has to be displaced in the direction of F, the system appears to arrive 
at a conflicting situation at the hip. For the desired direction of the 
force we need a hip flexing moment while for the desired displacement 
the hip has to be extended. Though such a movement is possible under 
the influence of the large extending knee moment, it would be ex- 
tremely inefficient from an energetical point of view if the required net 
moments at hip and knee had to be delivered by mono-articular 
muscles only. Work done by the shortening knee extensors would in 
part be converted into heat in the eccentrically contracting hip flexors. 
Activation of hip extensors (which are allowed to shorten) would be 
useless since the net moment at the hip would have to be opposed by a 
stronger activation of the hip flexors in order to assure the necessary 
net flexing moment. An opposite situation occurs if force and displace- 
ment are directed according to fig. 10~. In that situation one needs a 
strong hip extending moment and a knee flexing moment although 
both joints are extended if a displacement in the direction of F takes 
place. Again a situation where work done at one joint (the hip) is in 
part dissipated at another joint (the knee) if the net moments were to 
be delivered by mono-articular muscles only. 
As explained for joint power (product of net joint moment and joint 
angular velocity), bi-articular muscles can redistribute the magnitudes 
of the net moments over the joints that are crossed. The action required 
in situation lob can be performed with mono-articular muscles which 
are allowed to shorten by simultaneous activation of rectus femoris. 
This muscle can assure a flexing moment at the hip and support the 

--- Page 24 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to translation 325 
mono-articular knee extensors in the required large net extending 
moment. When a large force (and large amount of external work) is 
required, the shortening hip extensors may even support this movement 
as long as their contribution to the net hip moment is sufficiently 
counteracted by the opposing rectus femoris. The movement can be 
performed without eccentric contractions of mono-articular muscles. 
In a comparable way the action as indicated in fig. l Oc, can be 
effectively performed without eccentric contractions by activation of 
the bi-articular hamstrings which assure a knee flexing moment and 
support the required large extending moment at the hip. 
These actions of bi-articular muscles are not essentially different 
from the actions discussed for jumping. For both examples one might 
state that bi-articular muscles transport the mechanical output of 
contracting mono-articular muscles (work, power, force) to joints where 
it can be effectively used to fulfil the specific task demands. This 
statement appears also to be true for the adjustment of stiffness of the 
endpoint (e.g. hand) of an extremity (Hogan 1985). The intriguing 
question now arises to what extent the human action system utilizes 
this powerful capacity to effectively (and efficiently) direct an external 
force. Though the answer to this question is one of the aims of our 
present research, the results obtained for cycling can be judged as a 
first indication that the muscle activation patterns are indeed tuned to 
the utilisation of the unique properties of this versatile system. In the 
first part of the downstroke (0 -90 o ), the movement of the pedal has a 
forwards directed component while in the second part the direction is 
backwards and downwards. In order to direct the force on the pedal 
accordingly (at least in part) the sequential order of activation of rectus 
femoris and hamstrings is logical and necessary as long as the mono- 
articular muscles deliver force only in the phases where they can 
shorten. As also shown in previous studies (e.g. Gregor et al. 1985) the 
direction of the force indeed appears to shift from a position between 
those indicated in fig. 10a and 10b to that as indicated in fig. 10~ the 
net moment at the knee becoming negative at a crank angle of 130 O. 
Taking into account an EMD corresponding to 50 O, fig. 9 shows that 
the force (and power) contribution of the vasti will still be present 
(though decreasing) at that instant. 
For reasons of simplicity, the action of the calf muscles was not 
incorporated in the explanation of fig. 10, since such an incorporation 
would not influence the arguments essentially. For cycling it should be 

--- Page 25 ---

noted that the activation patterns of both gastrocnemius and soleus 
seem to be in concert with the mechanical requirements. Taking the 
EMD into account, the soleus seems to be activated to produce positive 
power. However, since the contraction velocities of soleus as well as 
gastrocnemius are small (less than 0.1 m/s) the contribution to external 
power is limited. The gastrocnemius is active over a wide range in 
accordance with the required plantar flexing moment which is positive 
between approximately 30 o and 290 o (Boots et al. under review). 
The principles, as indicated in fig. 10, are of course universal in the 
sense that the problems concerning the required net moments are 
present in any movement given a particular direction of the external 
force. In jumping, the changing co-activation patterns which are neces- 
sary to solve the problems associated with the geometrical constraint 
(eq. (2)) have of course also an effect on the direction of the force 
exerted on the ground. In fig. 11 the reaction force on the feet is 
indicated for subsequent phases during the push-off. It is obvious that 
the required direction of this force averaged over time will also con- 
strain the number of degrees of freedom in the push-off. Moreover, this 
mean direction will be different when leg extensions in different tasks 
are compared. This constraint based on the desired direction should be 
kept in mind when attempting to interpret patterns of inter-muscular 
coordination found in (sprint)running and jumping animals in the light 
of the geometrical constraint. 
5. Conclusions 
In summary it can be stated that the temporally ordered sequence of 
EMG patterns found in jumping and cycling seem to be in concert with 
the indicated constraints and the mechanically formulated specific task 
demands. Now that the unique action of bi-articular muscles is under- 
stood in the light of these constraints, it seems that Partridge (1986) 
was right in his prophecy that it is probable that we will find that what 
the nervous and the mechanical systems do together is both reasonable 
and done in a believable way . 
6. Discussion 
As indicated above, the constraints which were discovered in the 
studies of speed skating, jumping and cycling are universal in the sense 

--- Page 26 ---

that they are based on simple geometrical and mechanical laws which 
describe relations between the human action system and the environ- 
ment, as reduced to the desired direction of the external force and the 
mechanically formulated goal of the movement. The nature of these 
constraints is such that they do not constrain the number of degrees of 
freedom in an absolute sense. One can jump and throw by simulta- 
neous extension of the joints involved. One can also cycle with a force 
on the pedal which is directed in one particular direction throughout 
the downstroke. The movements are only constrained if one wants to 
jump as high as possible, to throw as hard as possible, to cycle 
economically and more general: to direct an external force without 
eccentric contractions. In such situations one has to deal (or to learn to 
deal) with the constraints which can be summarized as: 
(a) a geometrical constraint describing the transfer of a rotation in a 
joint into the desired translational velocity (eq. (2)); 
(b) an anatomically based requirement to (actively) decelerate an angu- 
lar velocity in joints prior to full extension; 
(c) the required distribution of net moments in the joints in order to 
exert the external force in a desired direction (illustrated in fig. 10); 
(d) the desired average direction of the external force on foot or hand 
during a proximo-distal sequence of the onset of joint rotations 
which are necessary to solve the problems associated with the 
geometrical constraint (illustrated in fig. 11). 
Clearly, these constraints can considerably reduce the number of 
redundant degrees of freedom in the extremities in many goal oriented 
human and animal movements. Especially if the consequences of the 
last constraint are fully understood, Alexander (1986) may be right that 
there will appear to be only few surplus degrees of freedom left in 
many movements. This of course is only the case as long as the human 
action system succeeds in utilising the unique actions of bi- (or poly-) 
articular muscles in adjusting the required distribution of net moments 
and power over the joints. 
The anatomical architecture of the extremities appears to be highly 
functional to meet the requirements described for jumping and throw- 
ing. For an effective proximo-distal sequence of onset of joint rotations 
necessary in ballistic movements it was argued that one needs at least 
three body segments in an extremity as well as bi-articular muscles. 

--- Page 27 ---

328 G.J. wn Ingen Schenou / From rotation to tmnslatron 
Fig. 11. The direction of the ground reaction force in a push-off is predominantly determined by 
the distribution of net moments over the joints. The proximo-distal sequence iti increase of muscle 
activation as found in vertical jumping (fig. 1) is therefore also reflected by changes in direction of 
this ground reaction force. Together with gravity the direction of this force determines the 
direction of acceleration (and final velocity) of the body center of gravity as well as the angular 
momentum of the body with respect to its center of gravity. 
Moreover the more distally located, the higher the necessary angular 
velocities and accelerations. This appears to be realised by a transport 
of power to the distally located joints and the release of elastic energy 
from long tendons of the muscles which cross the wrist or ankle joint 
and which can give the most distal segments (foot, hand), with their 
small moments of inertia, a high angular velocity. As indicated above, 
the effective utilisation of this versatile system requires a distinct 
temporally ordered sequence in muscle activation. The position taken 
here is that it would be surprising if we were to find that the human 
action system did not utilise this system to solve the problems associ- 
ated with the constraints. In this sense the observed global EMG 
patterns were judged to be logical in the light of the described con- 
straints. This does not mean that observed sequence reflects an optimal 
timing. The incorporation of many other factors as well as simulation 
experiments will be necessary to decide what time sequence would lead 
to an optimal jumping height or an optimal transfer of muscle power to 

--- Page 28 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotution to trunslutton 329 
pedal power in cycling (it would be interesting to investigate if the 
relative timing changes during a learning or training process). 
Since the constraints are mainly a function of the angles in the joints 
in relation to the direction of the external force and not, or to a much 
lesser extent, to the velocity of the movement, one might speculate that 
the invariance in the temporal structure of a movement sequence as 
often indicated in the literature (Schmidt 1985; 1986; Kelso and Tuller 
1984b; Kelso and Schoner 1988; Ostry and Wilkinson 1986; Shapiro et 
al. 1981), are associated with the need to solve the problems associated 
with these constraints. This means that these invariances do not neces- 
sarily support the hypothesis of motor or action theorists concerning 
the organisation of movement control. 
From the simulation experiments it was clear, however, that manipu- 
lations with, for example, added masses or different knee flexion angles 
in jumping will require differences in optimal relative timing. Present 
experiments are aimed to investigate if and to what extent the relative 
timing might be adjusted to such changing circumstances as previously 
reported for the timing of muscle activity during fast (but less com- 
plicated) limb movements (Marsden et al. 1983). 
As indicated in the introduction section, the examples presented here 
are descriptive rather than explanatory. As such the results do not shed 
light on questions as to how these and other movements are organised. 
However, a few possible implications for existing theories may stimu- 
late the discussion which is to follow this paper. 
6.1. The need for top-down studies 
It has been argued by many authors that the environment may 
provide an important source of constraint on most movements (e.g. 
Bernstein 1967; Fowler and Turvey 1978; Kelso and Tuller 1984a; 
Bingham 1988). Clearly, the constraints presented in this paper would 
not have been discovered if the movements were not analysed in 
relation to the external forces (ground or pedal reaction force and 
gravity), and the mechanical goal of the movement (in the applied 
inverse dynamics, the influence of inertial forces is implicitely accounted 
for). Moreover, it is a matter of course that studies on isolated muscles 
or on monoarticular movements will never shed light on the unique 
action of bi-articular muscles and the backgrounds of coordination 
between these muscles and their mono-articular antagonist. Though on 

--- Page 29 ---

the lower level of description the approach used in this study thus 
seems to be in agreement with the arguments formulated by so-called 
action theorists (e.g. Reed 1982; Fowler and Turvey 1978; Turvey and 
Kugler 1984; Kelso and Schoner 1988) that studies of human move- 
ment should include at least the actor, his actions and the environment. 
It is however difficult for the present author to imagine how cultural 
skills (Van Wieringen 1988) such as cycling and speed skating might 
spontaneously emerge on the basis of extero- and proprioceptive infor- 
mation or by a free interplay of forces as advocated by these authors. 
Especially in speed skating it is common knowledge that it takes years 
before one is able to suppress plantar flexion and to push-off in an 
effective direction (Van Ingen Schenau et al. 1987b) which seems to 
point to a neurally based constraint coupling knee extension to plantar 
flexion in explosive leg extensions. Such hard wired (or learned) neu- 
rally based constraints have often been described (e.g. Grillner 1981; 
Sanes and Jennings 1984; Perret and Cabelguen 1980: Grillner and 
Wallen 1985). Nevertheless, the approach and the results presented 
here, support the need for top-down studies. 
6.2. Co-uctivution of untug-onists 
Since Bernstein (1967) many authors have stressed the necessity for 
minimal neural calculation. The results presented in this study may 
further complicate the intriguing question how we manage to move so 
well in a world who s laws are so poorly understood (Bullock and 
Grossberg 1988). We have to deal with many factors such as internal 
time constants in neuronal networks and in muscle tendon complexes, 
intrinsic muscle properties, changing moment arms, effects of pre- 
stretch, fatigue, metabolic rates, the need for joint stability and the 
problem how to handle the overwhelming amount of extero- and 
proprioceptive information. Following Bernstein (1967) many authors 
have argued against the predetermination (and internal representation) 
of all such details in the organisation of movement. One of the most 
popular hypothesis proposed to (partly) solve this problem, is based on 
point attractor dynamics (e.g. Munhall 1986). Especially for mono- 
articular movements but recently also for poly-articular movements 
many authors reported results in favor of the spring-like behavior of 
the extremities (e.g. Asatryan and Feldman 1965; Feldman 1980a,b, 

--- Page 30 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schrnuu / From rofat~on 10 translatron 331 
1986; Bizzi 1980; Bizzi et al. 1982; Hogan 1984, 1985; Berkinblit et al. 
1986; Bizzi et al. 1986; Mussa-Ivaldi et al. 1985; Flash 1987). In these 
hypotheses it is assumed that the central nervous system defines an 
equilibrium point (or a trajectory of subsequent equilibrium points) by 
(co-)contraction of a set (or a number of sets) of agonist and antagonist 
muscles. As shown above, both in jumping as well as in cycling 
significant periods of co-contraction of agonist and antagonist muscles 
can be observed. Though the necessity for these co-contractions was 
explained in the light of the constraints, the question may arise to what 
extent these co-contractions might simultaneously fit in a strategy of 
control of a shifting equilibrium point. Following Schmidt (1986) one 
might argue that such a control of a shifting equilibrium point would 
also require a central representation of the temporal structure. A 
second argument, however, against the equilibrium point hypothesis in 
the control of cycling and jumping movements in based on the contrac- 
tion velocities of the co-contracting sets of agonist and antagonist 
muscles. An equilibrium position is defined by opposing length-force 
curves of the agonist and antagonists muscles (Bizzi et al. 1982; 
Berkinblitt et al. 1986; Vincken and Denier van der Gon. 1985). 
Therefore the spring-like behavior assumes the lengthening of the 
antagonists if the agonists shorten and vice versa. During the entire 
push-off in jumping and during the periods of co-contraction in cycling 
the described co-contracting agonists and antagonists all shorten. This 
means that control of an equilibrium point is not likely in these 
movements (in the knee joint such an action should have to be realised 
by for example the short head of biceps femoris). 
As demonstrated before (see Smith (1981) for reference), co-contrac- 
tions of agonist and bi-articular antagonists often occur and seem not 
to be constrained by reciprocal inhibition as often stated since Sher- 
rington (1909) (e.g. Fujiwara and Basmajian 1975; and Kumamoto 
1984). It is tempting to speculate that in the light of the constraints 
discussed here, these co-contractions may also appear to be functional 
and effective in other movements such as walking (Wells and Evans 
1987). In this respect it should be noted that in the light of the 
indispensable action of bi-articular muscles indicated above, man (and 
animals) would be severely handicapped if bi-articular muscles were to 
be activated according to the decision algorithm as proposed by these 
authors (Wells and Evans 1987; Wells 1988). Their algorithm suggests 
that these muscles are only usefully activated if they support the net 

--- Page 31 ---

332 G.J. uan lngen Schenau / From rotution to trun.rlrrtmn 
moments in both joints that are crossed. Fortunately the activation of 
bi-articular muscles is not dependent on net moments but they rather 
determine these moments together with their mono-articular agonists 
and antagonists. 
6.3. Final remarks 
The more one is accustomed to think in terms of net (pure) moments 
and inverse dynamics, the more the constraints discussed in this article 
appear to be self-evident. It took several years, however, to gain the 
insight presented in this paper and it will take many more years to gain 
insight into the consequences for other types of movement and to 
incorporate this knowledge in studies aimed to shed light on the 
intriguing question how the human action system manages to (learn to) 
deal with these and other constraints. The preliminary position taken 
here is that it is assumed that these synergistic acts have to be learned. 
This position is based on the exciting results obtained in research to (or 
simulation of) parallel processing neural networks and their impressing 
capacity to learn (e.g. Hopfield 1982, 1984; Grossberg 1985; Bullock 
and Grossberg 1988; Coolen and Gielen 1988; Gielen and Coolen in 
press). 
Based on the present results on jumping and cycling it is tempting to 
speculate about different processes in learning to control mono- and 
bi-articular muscles. In both acts all mono-articular muscles are active 
when they are allowed to shorten and produce positive work (might be 
learned or controlled on the basis of relatively simple sensory informa- 
tion as for example from muscle spindle afferents). Bi-articular muscles, 
however, seem to be the major instruments to meet the specific task 
demands. Learning to control these muscles might be subject of a much 
more complicated process. Though these remarks of course are highly 
speculative, some support for different learning and/or control 
processes might be deduced from studies of walking, running and 
jumping cats (e.g. Walmsley et al. 1978; Perret and Cabelguen 1980; 
Spector et al. 1980), activation patterns of mono and bi-articular 
muscles during cycling at different speeds (Suzuki et al. 1982; Greig et 
al. 1985) and possibly from the development of coordination of mono- 
and bi-articular musles in children (Thelen 1985). 

--- Page 32 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to transhon 333 
References 
Agarwal, G.C. and G.L. Gottlieb. 1986. Complexity in control of movements. The Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences 9, 599-600. 
Alexander, R.Mc N., 1986. Do legs have surplus degrees of freedom? The Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences 9, 600. 
Andrews, J.G., 1987. The functional roles of the hamstrings and quadriceps during cycling. 
Lombards paradox revisited. Journal of Biomechanics 20, 565-575. 
Asatryan, D.G. and A.G. Feldman, 1965. Functional tuning of the nervous system with control of 
movement or maintenance of a steady posture I. Mechanographic analyses of the work of the 
Joint on the execution of a postural task. Biophysics 10. 925-935. 
Beek. P.J. and W.J. Beck, 1988. Tools for constructing dynamical models of rhythmic movement. 
Human Movement Science 7, 301-342. 
Bell, D.G. and I. Jacobs, 1986. Electra-mechanical response times and rate of force development 
in males and females. Medicine and Science in Sports and Exercise 18, 31-36. 
Berkinblit, M.B., A.G. Feldman and 0.1. Fukson. 1986. Adaptability of innate motor patterns and 
motor control mechanisms. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 9. 585-63X. 
Bernstein, N.A., 1967. The coordination and regulation of movements. London: Pergamon Press. 
Bingham, G.P.. 1988. Task-specific devices and the perceptual bottleneck. Human Movement 
Sciences I, 2255264. 
Bizzi, E., 1980. Central and peripheral mechanisms in motor control . In: G.E. Stelmach and J. 
Requin (eds.), Tutorial in motor behavior. Amsterdam: North-Holland. pp. 131-144. 
Bizzi, E., W. Chapple and N. Hogan, 1982. Mechanical properties of muscles. Implications for 
motor control. Trends in Neuroscience 5, 3955398. 
Bizzi. E., F.A. Mussa-Ivaldi and N. Hogan, 1986. Regulation of multi-joint armposture and 
movement . In: H.J. Freund, U. Buttner, H. Cohen and J. Noth (eds.). Progress in Brain 
Research 64. 345-351. 
Bobbert, M.F., 1988. Vertical jumping. A study of muscle functioning and coordination. Amster- 
dam: Free University Press. 
Bobbert, M.F. and G.J. van Ingen Schenau, 1988. Coordination in vertical jumping. Journal of 
Biomechanics 21, 249-262. 
Bobbert, M.F., P.A. Huijing and G.J. van Ingen Schenau, 1986a. A model of human triceps surae 
muscle-tendon complex applied to jumping. Journal of Biomechanics 18, 8877898. 
Bobbert. M.F., P.A. Huijing and G.J. van Ingen Schenau, 1986b. An estimation of power output 
and work done by human triceps surae muscle-tendon complex in jumping. Journal of 
Biomechanics 18, 8999906. 
Bobbert, M.F.. E. Hoek. G.J. van Ingen Schenau, A.J. Sargeant and A.W. Schreurs, 1987. A model 
to demonstrate the power transporting role of bi-articular muscles. Journal of Physiology 387, 
24P. 
Boots, P.J.M.. R.J. Snackers, W.W.L.M. van Woensel, G. de Groat and G.J. van Ingen Schenau, 
nd. Intermuscular coordination in bicycling. (Submitted). 
Bootsma, R.J., 1988. The timing of rapid interceptive actions. Perception-action coupling in the 
control and acquisition of skill. Amsterdam: Free University Press. 
Bullock, D. and S. Grossberg, 1988. Neural dynamics of planned arm movements: Emergent 
invariants and speed-accuracy properties during trajectory formation. Psychological Review 
95, 49-90. 
Clauser, C.E., J.T. Mc Conville and J.W. Young, 1969. Weight, volume and center of mass of 
segments of the human body. Ohio: Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. p. 59. (AMRL-TR-69-70.) 
Coolen, A.C.C. and C.C.A.M. Gielen, 1988. Delays in neural networks. Europhysics Letters 7, 
281-285. 

--- Page 33 ---

Crowninshield. R.D. and R.A. Brand. 1981. A physiologically based criterion of muscle force 
prediction in locomotion. Journal of Biomechanics 14. 793-801. 
De Koning, J.J., G. de Groot and G.J. van Ingen Schenau, 1988. Muscle coordination in elite and 
tralncd speed skaters . In: W. Wallinga. H.B.K. Boom and J. de Vries (eds.). Electrophyaiologi- 
cal kinesiology. Amsterdam: Exerpta Medica. pp. 485-488. 
De Luca. C.J., 1988. The common drive of motor units . In: W. Wallinga. H.B.K. Boom and J. de 
Vries. Electrophysiological kinesiology. Amsterdam: Eaerpta Medica. pp. 35-38. 
Dempster. W., 1955. Space requirements of the seated operator. USAF, WADC. Technical Report 
55-159. OH: Wright-Patterson Air Force Base. 
Dul. J., M.A. Townsend. R. Shiavi and G.E. Johnson, 1984a. Muscular synergism-l. On criteria 
for load sharing between synergistic muscles. Journal of Biomecanlcs 17. 663-673. 
Dul, J., G.E. Johnson. R. Shiavi and M.A. Townsend, 1984b. Muscular synergism-II. A mini- 
mum-fatigue criterion for load sharing between synergistic muscles. Journal of Biomechanics 
17. 675-684. 
Elftman, H., l Y39a. Forces and energy changes in the leg during walking. American Journal of 
Physiology 125, 339-356. 
Elftman. H.. 1939b. The function of muscles in locomotion. American Journal of Physiology 125, 
357-366. 
Enoka. R.M., 1983. Muscular control of a learned movement: The speed control systems 
hypothesis. Experimental Brain Research 51. 135-145. 
Feldman. A.G.. l Y80a. Superposition of motor programs I: Rhytmic forearm movements in man 
Neuroscience 5, 81-90. 
Feldman. A.G., 1980b. Superposition of motor programs II: Rapid forearm flexion in man. 
Neuroscience 5, 91-95. 
Feldman, A.G., 1986. Once more on the equilibrium point-hypothesis (X-model) for motor 
control. Journal of Motor Behavior 18. 17-54. 
Fenn. W.O.. 1938. The mechanics of muscular contraction in man. Journal of Applied Physrcs 9. 
165-177. 
Fick. A.E.. 1879. ijber zweigelenkige Muskeln. Archiv. Anatomie Entwicklungsgeschichte 3, 
201-239. 
Flash. T., 1987. The control of hand equilibrium trajectories in multi-joint arm movements. 
Biological Cybernetics 57. 257-274. 
Flash. T. and N. Hogan, 1985. The coordination of arm movements: An experimentally confirmed 
mathematical model. The Journal of Neuroscience 5, 1688-1703. 
Fowler, C.A. and M.T. Turvey, 1978. Skill acquisition: An event approach with special reference 
to searching for the optimum of a function of several variables . In: G.E. Stelmach (ed.). 
Information processing and learning. New York: Academic Press. pp. l-40. 
Fu Jiwara, M. and J.V. Basmajian. 1975. Electromyographic study of two-joint muscles. American 
Journal of Physical Medicine 54, 234-241. 
Gielen, C.C.A.M. and A.C.C. Coolen. in press. Self organisation in neural networks underlying 
the coordination of movements. 
Gregoire, L., H.E. Veeger. P.A. Huijing and G.J. van Ingen Schenau. 1984. The role of mono- and 
bi-articular muscles in explosive movements. International Journal of Sports Medicine 5. 
301-305. 
Gregor, R.J., P.R. Cavanagh and M. Lafortune. 1985. Knee flexor moments during propulsion in 
cycling - A creative solution to Lombard s Paradox. Journal of Biomechanics 18. 307-316. 
Greig. G.. T. Hortobagyi and A.J. Sargeant, 1985. Quadriceps surface emg and fatigue during 
maximal dynamic exercise in man. Journal of Physiology 369, 18OP. 
Grieve. D.W.. S. Pheasant and P.R. Cavanagh, 1978. Prediction of gastrocnemius length from 
knee and ankle joint posture . In: E. Asmussen and K. Jorgensen (eds.). Biomechanics VI-A. 
Baltimore: University Park Press. pp. 405-412. 

--- Page 34 ---

G.J. uan Ingen Schenau / From rotation to trunslation 335 
Grillner, S.. 1981. Control of locomotion in bipeds, tetrapods and fish . In: V.B. Brooks (ed.). 
Handbook of Physiology Section 1, Vol. 2: The nervous system. motor control. Baltimore. 
MD: Waverly Press. pp. 117991236. 
Grillner. S. and P. Wallen, 1985. Central patterns generators for locomotion. with special 
reference to vertebrates. Annual Revue of Neuroscience 8, 2333261. 
Grossberg. S., 1985. The role of learning in sensory-motor control. The Behavioral and Brain 
Sciences 8. 1555157. 
Hamley, E.J. and V. Thomas, 1968. Physiological and postural factors in the calibration of the 
bicycle ergometer. Journal of Physiology 191, 55-57. 
Hochmuth. G., 1967. Biomechanik sportlicher Bewegungen. Frankfurt/Main: Wilhelm Limpert 
Verlag. 
Hof, A.L.. B.A. Geelen and J.W. van den Berg. 1983. Calf muscle moment, work and efficiency in 
level walking; role of series elasticity. Journal of biomechanics 16, 523-537. 
Hogan. N., 1984. An organizing principle for a class of voluntary movements, The Journal of 
Neuroscience 4, 274552754. 
Hogan, N., 1985. The mechanics of multi-Joint posture and movement control. Biological 
Cybernetics 52, 315-331. 
Hopfield. J.J., 1982. Neural network and physical systems with emergent collective computational 
abilities. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 79, 2554-2558. 
Hopfield, J.J.. 1984. Neurons with graded response have collective computational properties like 
those of two state neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 81. 3088-3092. 
Jongen, H.A.H.. C.C.A.M. Gielen and J.J. Denier van der Gon, in press. Activation of human arm 
muscles during flexion/extension and supination/pronation tasks: A theory on muscle 
coordination. Biological Cybernetics. 
Jorge, M. and M.L. Hull. 1986. Analysis of EMG measurements during bicycle pedalling. Journal 
of Biomechanics 19, 317-329. 
JBris, H.J.J., A.J. Edwards van Muyen, G.J. van Ingen Schenau and H.C.G. Kemper, 1985. Force, 
velocity and energy flow during the overarm throw in female handball players. Journal of 
Biomechechanics 18, 409-414. 
Kelso, J.A.S. and G. Schoner, 1988. Self organisation of coordinative movement patterns. Human 
Movement Science 7, 27-46. 
Kelso, J.A.S. and B. Tuller, 1984a. A dynamic basis for action systems . In: M.S. Gazzaniga (ed.), 
Handbook of cognitive neuroscience. New York: Plenum Press. pp. 321-356. 
Kelso. J.A.S. and B. Tuller, 1984b. Converging evidence in support of common dynamic principles 
for speech and movement coordination. American Journal of Physiology 246, R928-R935. 
Kumamoto, M., 1984. Antagonistic inhibition exerted between bi-articular leg muscles during 
simultaneous hip and knee extension movement . In: M. Kumamoto (ed.), Neural and 
mechanical control of movement. Kyoto: Yamaguchi Schoten. pp. 114-122. 
Lee, W.A.. 1984. Neuromotor synergies as a basis for coordinated intentional action. Journal of 
Motor Behavior 16, 1355170. 
Lombard, W.P., 1903. The action of two-joint muscles. American Physical Education Revue 8, 
141-145. 
Marsden. C.D., J.A. Obeso and J.C. Rothwell, 1983. The function of the antagonist muscle during 
fast limb movements in man. Journal of Physiology 335, l-13. 
Munhall, K.G.. 1986. Motor equivalence and goal descriptors. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 9, 
615-616. 
Mussa-Ivaldi. F.A., N. Hogan and E. B&i, 1985. Neural, mechanical and geometric factors 
subserving arm posture in humans. The Journal of Neuroscience 5. 2732-2743. 
Nordeen-Snyder, K.S., 1977. The effect of bicycle seat height variation upon oxygen consumption 
and lower limb kinematics. Medicine and Science in Sports 2, 1133117. 

--- Page 35 ---

Ostry, D.J. and F.E. Wilkinson, 1986. Can voluntary movement be understood on the basis of 
reflex organisation? The behavioral and Brain Sciences 9, 618-619. 
Partridge, L.D.. 1986. Frogs solve Bernstein s problem. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 9. 
619-620. 
Pedotti, A., V.V. Krishnan and L. Stork. 1978. Optimization of muscle-force sequencing in human 
locomotion. Mathematical Biosciences 38, 57-76. 
Perret, C. and J.M. Cabelguen, 1980. Main characteristics of the hindlimb locomotor cycle in the 
decorticate cat with special reference to bi-functional muscles. Brain Research 187, 333-352. 
Reed, ES., 1982. An outline of a theory on action systems. Journal of Motor Behavior 14, 98-134. 
Sanes, J.N. and V.A. Jennings, 1984. Centrally programmed patterns of muscle activity in 
voluntary motor behavior of humans. Experimental Brain Research 54. 23-32. 
Schmidt, R.A., 1985. Identifying units of motor behavior. The Behavioral and Brain Sciences 8, 
163-164. 
Schmidt, R.A., 1986. Controlling the temporal structure of limb movements. The Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences 9. 623-624. 
Shapiro. D.C., R.F. Zernicke, R.J. Gregor and J.D. Diestel, 1981. Evidence for generalized motor 
programs using gait pattern analysis. Journal of Motor Behavior 13. 33-47. 
Sherrington, C.S., 1909. Reciprocal innervation of antagonistic muscles. Fourteenth note. On 
double reciprocal innervation. Proceedings of the Royal Society London. Ser. B. 91. 2499268. 
Smith, A.M., 1981. The co-activation of antagonist muscle. Canadian Journal of Physiology and 
Pharmacology 59, 7333747.. 
Spector. S.A., P.F. Gardiner, R.F. Zernicke. R.R. Rog and V.R. Edgerton, 1980. Muscle architec- 
ture and force-velocity characteristics of cat soleus and medial gastrocnemius: implications for 
motor control. Journal of Neurophysiology 44. 951-960. 
Suzuki, S.. S. Watanabe and H. Saburo, 1982. EMG activity and kinematics of human cycling 
movements at different constant velocities. Brain Research 240. 245-258. 
Thelen, E.. 1985. Symplifying assumptions: Can development help? Behavioral and Brain Sciences 
8. 165-166. 
Turvey. M.T. and P.N. Kugler. 1984. An ecological approach to perception and action . In: 
H.T.A. Whiting (ed.), Human motor actions. Bernstein reassessed. Amsterdam: North-Hol- 
land. pp. 373-412. 
Van Ingen Schenau, G.J., 1982. The influence of air friction in speed skating. Journal of 
Biomechanics 15, 449-458. 
Van Ingen Schenau, G.J. and M.F. Bobbert, 1988. Intermusculaire koordinatie. De sequentie in 
timing van spieraktievatie in explosieve bewegingen. Geneeskunde en Sport 21, 198-213. 
Van Ingen Schenau, G.J., M.F. Bobbert and R.H. Rozendal, 1987a. The unique action of 
bi-articular muscles in complex movements. Journal of Anatomy 155, l-5. 
Van lngen Schenau, G.J., R.W. de Boer and G. de Groot, 1987b. On the technique of speed 
skating. International Journal of Sports Biomechanics 3, 419-431. 
Van Ingen Schenau. G.J., M.F. Bobbert. J.B. de Graaf and W.E. Tettero, 1988. The action of 
bi-articular muscles in explosive movements . In: N. Berme and A. Cappozzo (eds.), Biomecha- 
nits of human movement. Dordrecht: Martinus Nijhoff. 
Van Ingen Schenau. G.J., M.F. Bobbert, P.A. Huijing and R.D. Woittiez. 1985a. The instanta- 
neous torque-angular velocity-relation in plantar flexion during jumping. Medicine and 
Science in Sports Exercise 17, 422-426. 
Van Ingen Schenau, G.J.. G. de Groot and R.W. de Boer, 198513. The control of speed in elite 
female speed skaters. Journal of Biomechanics 18, 91-96. 
Van Ingen Schenau, G.J., W.W.L.M. van Woensel, P.J.M. Boots, R.J. Snackers and G. de Groot, 
n.d. The determination and interpretation of mechanical power in human movement. An 
application to ergometer cycling. (Submitted.) 

--- Page 36 ---

G.J. oan lngen Schenau / From rotation to trunslatton 331 
Van Wieringen, P.C.W.. 1988. Kinds and levels of explanation: Implications for the motor 
systems versus action systems controversy . In: O.G. Meijer and K. Roth (eds.), Complex 
movement behavior: The motor action controversy. Amsterdam: North-Holland. pp. 87-120. 
Vincken. H.M. and J.J. Denier van der Gon. 1985. Stiffness as a control variable in motor 
performance. Human Movement Science 4, 307-319. 
Walmsley, B., J.A. Hodgson and R.E. Burke, 1978. Forces produced by medial gastrocnemius and 
soleus muscles during locomotion in freely moving cats. Journal of Neurophysiology 41, 
1203-1216. 
Watkins. J., 1983. In introduction to the mechanics of human movement. Lancaster: MTP Press. 
Wells, R. and N. Evans, 1987. Functions and recruitment patterns of one- and two-joint muscles 
under isometric and walking conditions. Human Movement Science 6, 3499372. 
Wells, R.P., 1988. Mechanical energy costs of human movement: An approach to evaluating the 
transfer possibilities of two-joint muscles. Journal of Biomechanics 21, 955-964. 
Whiting, H.T.A. (ed), 1984. Human motor actions. Bernstein reassessed. Amsterdam: North-Hol- 
land. 
Warren, W.H., 1984. Percieving affordances: Visual guidance of stair climbing. Journal of 
experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance 10, 683-703. 
Winter, D.A., 1984. Kinematic and kinetic patterns in human gait: variability and compensating 
effects. Human Movement Science 3. 51-76. 

--- Page 37 ---

File: vaningenschenau1992.pdf
Size: 1228.05 KB
Token Count: 9728
Processed At: 2025-05-26T08:52:28.936266
----------------------------------------
Cleaned Content:
Neuroscience Vol. 46, No. 1, pp. 197-207, 1992 
Printed in Great Britain 0306-4522/92 $5.00 f0.00 
Pergamon Press pk 
Q 1991 IBRO 
THE CONSTRAINED CONTROL OF FORCE AND 
POSITION IN MULTI-JOINT MOVEMENTS 
G.J. VAN INCEN SCHENAU,* P.J.M.B~~Ts,G. DEGROOT, R.J. SNACKERS 
and W. W. L. M. VAN WOENSEL 
Faculty of Human Movement Sciences, Free University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Abstract-In many arm or leg movements the hand or foot has to exert an external force on the 
environment. Based on an inverse dynamical analysis of cycling, it is shown that the distribution of net 
moments in the joints needed to control the direction of the external force is often opposite to the direction 
of joint displacements associated with this task. Kinetic and kinematic data were obtained from five 
experienced cyclists during ergometer cycling by means of film analysis and pedal force measurement. An 
inverse dynamic analysis, based on a linked segments model, yielded net joint moments, joint powers and 
muscle shortening velocities of eight leg muscles. Activation patterns of the muscles were obtained by 
means of surface electromyography. 
The results show that the transfer of rotations in hip, knee and ankle joints into the translation of the 
pedal is constrained by conflicting requirements. This occurs between the joint moments necessary to 
contribute to joint power and the moments necessary to establish a direction of the force on the pedal 
which allows this force to do work on the pedal. Co-activation of mono-articular agonists and their 
bi-articular antagonists appear to provide a unique solution for these conflicting requirements: bi-articular 
muscles appear to be able to control the desired direction of the external force on the pedal by adjusting 
the relative dist~bution of net moments over the joints while mono-articular muscles appear to be 
primarily activated when they are in the position to shorten and thus to contribute to positive work. 
Examples are given to illustrate the universal nature of this constrained control of force (external) and 
position (joint). Based on this study and published data it is suggested that different processes may underlie 
the organization of the control of mono- and bi-articutar muscles. 
In multi-joint movements muscle actions are usually 
described in relation to the displacements in the joints 
required to a~omplish the task. Such a description 
corresponds with the classification of muscles into 
categories such as extensors, flexors, abductors and 
pronators. In the light of required joint displace- 
ments, co~ontractions of mono-artic~ar agonist and 
their bi-articular antagonist muscles are often judged 
as uneconomical since the force contribution of these 
muscles is assumed to be cancelled out at least in 
part. q.41 However, such co-contractions have been 
reported for various types of multi-articular move- 
ments. For leg extensions that occur in running, 
jumping, cycling and standing from a chair, it is often 
said that bi-articular muscles are activated together 
with mono-articular antagonists, despite the fact that 
the required displacement in one of the spanned joints 
is opposite to the moment which is caused by the 
muscle.~~ 1~ 2~ 5~ 7~ 9~32~46 In the light of the traditional 
degrees of freedom problem it is attractive to ascribe 
such co-contractions to the way in which the CNS 
organizes the control of movement. Co-contractions 
of agonist and antagonist may play a role in servo 
control theories such as the well known equilib~um 
._ --- 
*To whom correspondence should be addressed at: Free 
University, Dept Functional Anatomy, van der Boe- 
chorststraat 9, 1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
Abbnviation: EMG, electromyogram. point hypotheses.3~7* 4*25,268,438 However, recently it was 
shown that for ballistic movements such as jumping 
and throwing, these co-contractions can be explained 
as highly functional actions necessary to avoid a 
premature termination of the movement.*.27 
Bi-articular muscles appear to be able to redis- 
tribute net moments and power over the joints that 
are crossed in order to meet the mechanically formu- 
lated task demands which, in the case of jumping, can 
be formulated as the need for the translational accel- 
eration of the body s centre of gravity. 
In an inverse dynamical analysis of cycling we 
realized that the need for this action of bi-articular 
muscles can be formulated from a much broader 
perspective. In any arm or leg movement where the 
hand or foot exerts a force on the environment in a 
particular direction, the control of the external force 
appears to require a specific distribution of net 
moments over the joints. This requirement is not 
accounted for by existing theories of motor control 
such as servo control hypotheses. Based on the 
analysis of cycling it is hypothesized that mono- and 
bi-articular muscles may have different roles in the 
control of such multi-joint movements. 
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES 
Five well-trained male cyclists consented to participate in 
the experiments [mean height 184.0 cm (S.D. 4.9 cm), mean 
weight 75.5 kg (SD. 2.6 kg), mean age 21.6 (S.D. 3.8)). The 
197 

--- Page 1 ---

subjects cycled on a Monark ergometer for 5 min. In the first 
minute the imposed power output was 200 W and in the 
second minute 260 W. In the third, fourth and fifth minutes 
the power was 350 W at a required pedal rate of 90 r.p.m. 
Data were collected during five revolutions after 3, 4 and 
5 min. The purpose of this protocol was to familiari~ the 
subjects with the experimental situation and to obtain a 
gradual increase in the required power output of 350 W. 
This relatively high load setting was chosen to obtain high 
signal to noise ratios. Toe clips and cleated shoes were worn 
by all subjects. They rode in drop-bar position. The angle 
between the top of the crista iliaca, trochanter major and the 
horizontal was 79.69 (S.D. 12.08 ). The seat height was 
adjusted to 100% trochanter height.2 .25 Seat height was 
defined as the distance between the top of the seat and the 
surface of the pedal, measured along the seat tube. The 
length of the crank was 17.5 cm. The Monark ergometer was 
equipped with two pedals which measured the forces along 
and perpendicular to the pedal surface. Incremental en- 
coders (Leine and Linde B model 63) were used to measure 
the angle between the crank and the pedal surface, and the 
angle of the crank with respect to the vertical. A light- 
emitting diode, connected to the encoders, acted as an 
indicator of top dead centre. 
Data collection was started at top dead centre at a 
sampling rate of 150 per revolution. Forces, angles and the 
time elapsed between two samples, were stored in a micro- 
computer. Electromyographic (EMG) activity was taken 
from nine muscles: rectus femoris, gluteus maximus, vastus 
lateralis, vastus medialis, biceps femoris (caput longurn), 
semitendinosus, gastrocnemius medialis, soleus and tibialis 
anterior. 
Surface electrodes (Sentry silver chloride) were positioned 
at the approximate geometrical centre of the muscle belly, 
with an inter-electrode distance of 3 cm. A telemetrical 
EMG set (Glonner Biomes 90) was used. The EMC signals 
and a pulse to the light-emitting diode were stored on tape 
(TEAC DT-400) with a portable data recorder (TEAC 
SR-70, bandwidth G-625 Hz). Raw electromyograms were 
filtered (bandpass 15-100 Hz, 6 d B/oct), rectified and AD- 
converted (12 bit, sampling frequency 400 Hz) to the 
microcomputer. 
The EMG data were time-averaged with a window of 
25 ms (no phase shift) and normalized to peak activity level 
within one revolution. 9 This procedure was chosen since we 
were mainly interested in the temporally ordered sequence 
of changes in muscle activation. When interpreting changes 
in muscle activity it is necessary to account for a phase shift 
between the linear envelopes of activity and changes in the 
mechanical response of the muscles. In previously published 
experiments2 c we applied a cross correlation technique to 
determine the mean phase shift for the vastus lateralis in 
repeated isometric knee extensions and found a mean value 
of 88 ms for five subjects. This result fits well in the 
phase shifts as can be deduced from the low pass cut off 
frequencies recommended by Olney and Winter36 for a 
number of human leg muscles. At the applied cycle fre- 
quency of 90 r.p.m. this phase shift corresponds to a crank 
angle of 47.5 . 
The sag&al plane of the subjects and bicycle was filmed 
with a mechanically driven camera (Bdex Paillard 16 RC) 
at 67 frames/s. The camera was positioned perpendicular to 
the plane of motion of the pedal at 5.5 m. A vertical bar and 
a horizontal bar were placed in the same plane as the bicycle. 
in order to reconstruct actual 2D coordinates afterwards. 
All data were taken from the right leg. Markers were placed 
on the crank axis, the pedal axis, the fifth metatarsopha- 
langeal joint, the malleolus lateralis, the estimated centre of 
rotation of the knee, the trochanter major, the top of the 
crista iliaca and a fixed point of reference. The films were 
analysed using a motion analyser (Summagraphics super- 
grid) and the coordinates obtained were scaled and filtered 
(butterworth 4th order low p WS filter. zero lag. cut off frequency 17 Hz). Crank, ankle, knee and trunk angles and 
positions of joints and mass centres of segments were 
calculated from these coordinates. First and second 
derivatives were calculated using a five-point numerical 
differentiation procedure in order to obtain the angular 
accelerations of the segments and the translational accelera- 
tions of the segmental centres of gravity. After synchroniza- 
tion, a rigid link segment model was used to obtain net 
moments at the hip, knee and ankle joints. This was 
performed by applying Newtonian equations of angular and 
translational motion on the different segments (the foot and 
pedal, the lower leg and the upper leg). The relative 
locations of the segmental centres of gravity, the masses of 
the segments and their moments of inertia were obtained 
using the data of Dempsteri and the measured segment 
lengths and body weights of the subjects. Moments having 
a hip extending, knee extending and plantar flexing influence 
were defined as positive. Net power output about the joints 
was calculated by multiplying the net moments and joint 
angular velocities. Muscle shortening velocities were calcu- 
lated as the time differential of muscle length. Muscle length 
was calculated on the basis of equations of muscle length as 
a function of segment length and angle(s) crossed by the 
muscle. In the absence of a complete data set the equations 
were from Grieve et al. for the calf muscles, Visser er ~1.~ ~ 
for the vasti, rectus femoris and hamstrings, and Nemeth 
and Ohlsen34b for the nluteus maximus. No model was found 
for the tibialis anterior. The contraction velocity pattern of 
this muscle till approximate the reciprocal pattern of the 
soleus. Muscle shortening was defined as positive. 
Film and pedal force data were used to reconstruct the 
line of action of the force of the pedal relative to the hip, 
knee and ankle joint. The reconstructions help visualize the 
contribution of net moments in the joints to the control of 
the direction of force. After averaging the cycles per subject. 
mean curves were calculated for the five subjects. 
Since the purpose of this study was to illustrate a univer- 
sal constraint in the control of (pedal) force and (pedal and 
joint) position, the results and discussion are focused on 
these mean curves only. 
RESULTS 
Mean curves of joint power and joint moments are 
shown in Fig. 1. 
In the light of the purpose of this study it is 
important to note the phase shift in peak power and 
net moments between knee and hip. Around top dead 
centre (0 ) the moment in the hip was low while the 
knee already shows a considerable extending mo- 
ment. During the downstroke (0 180 ) the moment 
in the knee decreased to negative values. When 
expressed in terms of the relative contributions of the 
hip and knee, the results show a shift in net moments 
from the knee to the hip during the downstroke. Since 
both joints are extended during this phase, this shift 
in net moments also explains the phase shift in the net 
joint power between both joints. The shift in the 
distribution of net moments in the hip and knee is, to 
a large extent, associated with a change in the direc- 
tion of the force on the pedal. This can be deduced 
from the inverse dynamical analysis which shows that 
the joint moments are largely determined by the 
magnitude and direction of the reaction force on the 
foot. The reason is that this force is much larger (up 
to 450 N) than the inertial and gravitational forces on 
the segments, For those who are not familiar with 

--- Page 2 ---

The control of force and position 199 
JOINT POWER JOINT MOMENT 
HIP 
w I 
600 
I 
w 
600 
400 
200 
0 
t ANKLE 
I I I NSI 
KNEE 
urn 
50 
0 
-50 ANKLE 
I I 1 
0 90 180 270 360 0 90 180 270 360 
crank angle (degrees) 
Fig. 1. Mean curves of joint power and joint moments as a function of crank angle (0 is top dead centre). 
inverse dynamics, it may be convenient to obtain a analysis (Fig. 1). Mean muscle activation patterns are 
global impression of the relation between the direc- shown in Fig. 3. Bars indicate the periods of hip 
tion of the external force and the distribution of net extension, knee extension and plantar flexion. These 
moments over the joints by plotting the line of action periods correspond to the periods of shortening of 
of this force relative to the joints. This is illustrated the mono-articular hip extensors, knee extensors 
in Fig. 2. Note that the line of action of the pedal and plantar flexors, respectiveiy. 6~20 Phases of co- 
force is changed in such a way that the direction of activation of mono- and bi-articular muscles appear 
the reaction force on the foot changes from pointing to be a co-activation of gluteus maximus and rectus 
just in front of the hip joint to a direction which runs femoris starting in the last part of the upstroke and 
in front of the knee during the last part of the down- ending halfway the downstroke and a co-activation 
stroke. If one tries to imagine which moments would 
be necessary to oppose the moment of the reaction of both vastii on the one hand and hamstrings and 
gastrocnemius on the other hand. Tibialis anterior 
force relative to the hip and knee joint, it will be clear shows relatively large activity during the second part 
that such a simplified inspection leads to a reasonable of the upstroke while the soleus is active during the 
approach of the moments as found in the actual mid-phase of the downstroke. Around 90 the mono- 

--- Page 3 ---

G. J. VAN INGEN SCHENALJ et d. 
HIP \ 
Fig. 2. During the cycting push off the direction of the force on the pedal changes. This has a strong 
influence on the position of the hip, knee and ankle joint relative to the line of action of this force. 
articular hip and knee extensors, as well as the 
bi-articular rectus femoris, hamstrings and gastrocne- 
mius are all active. 
Figure 4 presents a comparison of muscle shorten- 
ing velocities and the muscle activation patterns of 
Fig. 3 which are now shifted to the right over an angle 
of 47.5 . This corresponds to the phase shift between 
the linear envelopes and the mechanical response of 
the muscles. Note that for the mono-articular muscles 
there is a correspondence between the muscle mech- 
anical responses and the shortening velocities during 
muscle shortening while this is less clear for the 
bi-articular rectus femoris and hamstring muscles. 
DISCUSSION 
The major point of this study concerns the require- 
ment to control the direction of an external force. The 
fact that cyclists appear to change the direction of the 
force on the pedal from slightly forwards to slightly 
backwards is obviously related to the necessity to do 
work on the pedal. The experimental data illustrate 
that there is a distinct relation between the desired 
direction of this external (pedal) force and the distri- 
bution of net moments necessary to realize that 
desired force direction. The results also show that 
these net moments do not necessarily correspond to 
the directions of the changes in joint position. 
Although this study was primarily concerned with 
investigating a basic principle, a few remarks may be 
made about the reliability of the data. The global 
muscle activity patterns appear to correspond to 
those described by many others. , . 8. Y.1 In particu- lar, the co-activation of vasti and hamstrings is often 
addressed and judged as paradoxical or ineffi- 
cient. . *, 9 When differences in mean power are taken 
into account, the joint moment and joint power 
patterns agree with those published by others. 3. 9. 9 
This is also true for the direction of the pedal force 
which means that the results presented are represen- 
tative for other populations of cyclists as well. The 
main purpose of this study was to explain these global 
patterns in the light of the transfer of rotations in 
joints into the desired translation of the pedal. Since 
the movements in the ankle were small (see the low 
power output in Fig. I), this transfer is mainly 
performed by movements in the knee and hip joints. 
It is important to realize that the control of the 
direction of an external force requires a particular 
distribution of net moments over the joints. Though 
this implicitly follows from inverse dynamical analy- 
ses, it may be convenient to discuss this principle on 
the basis of some additional simplified examples. 
Consider a subject who wants to exert an external 
force in the three directions as shown in Fig. 5. Using 
inverse dynamics it can be shown that each direction 
requires a distinct combination of net moments in the 
hip, knee and ankle joints. When gravity and inertial 
forces are neglected one can obtain these moments 
directly from the magnitude of the force and the 
shortest distance between the rotation centres in the 
joints and the line of action of the reaction force 
(Fig. 5, F,). In this simpiified example it is clear that 
a task as shown in Fig. 5a requires a net hip extending 
moment (Fig. 5, Mh,) combined with a net knee 
ffexing moment (Fig. 5, M,,). A slightly more verti- 

--- Page 4 ---

The control of force and position 201 
HIP 
GM- 
L I RF -.-.-.- 
0 60 180 270 360 
WW= 
KNEE 
1 
VM . __ - - _ _ 
VI. _,_ ._ .- 
ST - 
I SF t .,....,.... 
0 60 160 270 360 degrees 
ANKLE 
SO ____ 
GA- 
4-j TA . . -.-._ 
0 60 180 270 360 degrees 
Fig. 3. Activation patterns of gluteus maximus (GM), rectus 
femoris (RF), vastus medialis and iateraiis (VM and VL), 
semitendinosis (ST), biceps femoris (BF), soleus (SO), 
gastrocnemius (GA) and tibialis anterior (TA). Patterns 
(expressed in arbitrary units) were derived by means of a 
(zero phase lag) low pass filter procedure. Bars indicate the 
periods of hip extension, knee extension and plantar flexion. 
tally directed external force (Fig. Sb, F,,) requires a 
smaller net hip extending moment (Fig. 5, MU) but 
now combined with a knee extending moment (Fig. 5, 
M,,). If one wants to push slightly forwards as shown 
in Fig. 5c the moment in the hip has to be flexing 
while the required knee extension moment is con- 
siderably larger than in the case shown in Fig. Sb. 
Clearly, the direction of an external force strongly 
depends on the net moments in the joints. Though 
not illustrated in Fig. 5 this, of course, includes the 
net moment in the ankle joint. 
It should be noted that actual moments can con- 
siderably deviate from these estimated on the basis of 
such simplified (mass-less) examples since they also 
have to deal with the influence of gravity and the 
acceleration of the limbs. A comparison of the actual 
joint moments presented in Fig. 1 with the lines of action relative to the joints presented in Fig. 2 shows 
that the influence of these inertial and gravitational 
effects is present but limited in this task. However, the 
influence of inertial forces will increase at increasing 
pedalling rates. The central nervous system has to 
deal with these inertial forces to maintain the correct 
direction of the force on the pedal. However, in 
general it can be stated that the control of an external 
force always requires a particular distribution of net 
moments over the joints. Each combination of net 
moments will lead to a particular direction and 
magnitude of the external force at given inertial and 
gravitational forces. 
The essential point in the present study arises when 
we consider that the forces indicated in Fig. 5 are 
meant to do work on the environment. This is 
illustrated in Fig. 6 where the point of application of 
external force is supposed to be displaced along the 
line of action of external force (as shown in Fig. 5a, 
F,). We now appear to arrive in a truly nice conflict 
between the requirements for the desired direction of 
the force and the desired displacement of the foot. 
The desired direction of the force requires a knee 
flexing moment, while the desired displacement of the 
foot requires knee extension. 
When expressed in joint work (as defined as the 
integral of net joint moment to joint displacement), 
one can speak of a conflict between the required 
moments. For the control of the direction of the 
external force we need a flexing moment while if the 
knee extension were to contribute to external work 
we would need an extending moment. 
This type of conflict is present in many other 
movements as well. Consider a person seated at a 
table who is asked to push an object over the table 
in the direction indicated by the arrow in Fig. 7. An 
inverse dynamical analysis would show that this task 
can only be executed with a combination of a net 
flexing moment in the elbow and a flexing moment in 
the shoulder. However, when expressed in terms of 
joint positions, the task requires an extension in the 
elbow and a flexion in the shoulder which leads to 
convicting req~rements at the elbow. It will not be 
difficult to realize that if the person was asked to push 
the object upwards (in the plane of the table) the task 
would still require shoulder flexion and elbow exten- 
sion but now the net moment in the elbow should be 
an extending moment while the direction of the 
external force now requires a small extending 
moment at the shoulder joint. These examples iltus- 
trate that the type of conflict seen in cycling is present 
in many other tasks as well. It should further be 
emphasized that in many tasks the requirement for 
the control of an external force should be judged 
to be essentially independent from the requirement 
for joint displacements. This can easily be seen if we 
consider a case in which the object in Fig. 7 is not 
supported by the table and executed with the same 
joint displacements but under different angles relative 
to gravity: the same displacements would require 

--- Page 5 ---

202 G. J. VAN INCEN SCHENAU ef rtl. 
CID/S 
40 - GM RF 
 b 
'\\ _,,, ,.. "r"f....*, 
! . . ) 
:" o" / 
so0 / 
"%Jf O" ..I' .I...' . 360' 
-20 - . . . . . . 
40 
20 
0 
-20 
40 
20 
0 
-20 
/ . . ::: : -I; rr 
..I 
crank angle BF 
: . . . . . . . I. ._ _: 
I ,a ..... 0 
. ..9d . 180 . ..___.. 270 a__*. 
crank angle 
Fig. 4. Muscle mechanical response (MMR) curves (solid lines) and muscle shortening patterns (Vo,) 
(dotted lines) for four mono- and four bi-articular muscles as a function of crank angle. MMR curves 
are obtained by shifting the activation patterns of Fig. 3 to the right over an angle of 47.5 which 
corresponds to a phase shift between muscle activity and mechanical response of 88 ms. Abbreviations 
as for Fig. 3. 
different contributions of net moments. This means 
that the central nervous system has to control both 
aspects simultaneously: the required joint displace- 
ments as well as the net moments associated with the 
desired direction of the external force. 
Co -activation of mono - and bi-articular muscles 
If the extremities were equipped with mono- 
articular muscles only (comparable to torque motors in robots) the requirements for the knee in cycling 
could not be satisfied since the moment necessary to 
do work in knee extension (Fig. 6, M,) would be 
opposite to the moment required to maintain the 
desired direction of the force (Fig. 6, Mr). This would 
mean that this particular combination would not be 
possible with a control of one moment in the knee. 
The only possible solution would be that the hip 
extensors push the knee to extension against the 
opposing mono-articular knee flexors which have to 

--- Page 6 ---

The control of force and position 203 
Fig. 5. The direction of an external force (F3 is controlled by a distinct combination of moments in the 
joints. Though intertial forces and gravity also influence this combination, a global impression of the 
required distribution of moments can be judged on the basis of the location of the joints relative to the 
line of action of the reaction force (F,). 
be activated in order to maintain the direction of 
external force (Fig. 6, F,). Such a solution, however, 
would lead to a waste of energy which would be 
degraded into heat in the necessary eccentric contrac- 
tions of the knee flexors. Moreover, the knee exten- 
sors which have the potention to deliver positive 
work, since they are in the position to shorten 
(Fig. 4) would have to remain relaxed. For many leg 
and arm movements the transfer of joint rotations 
into the desired translations of hand or foot would be 
very inefficient and difficult to control. 
It is interesting to speculate that these fundamental 
problems may be an important reason for the evol- 
ution of muscles that cross more than one joint. 
These muscles can change the distribution of net 
moments over the joints that are crossed. This is 
illustrated in Fig. 8. In the first part of the down- 
stroke in cycling (around 0 ) the action force on the 
pedal has a forward component (see also Fig. 2). 
Obviously, this is because the displacement of the 
pedal has a forward directed component and since 
(by definition) the force can do more work on the 
pedal the more it is directed according to the displace- 
ment of its point of force application. This direction 
will be achieved if the extending moment in the hip 
is small relative to the extending moment in the knee 
(Fig. 5). By activating the rectus femoris muscle such 
a distribution can be achieved without de-activation 
of the gluteus maximus. This means that in this phase 
both the mono-articular knee extensors as well as the mono-articular hip extensors can be active and 
deliver positive work while the bi-articular rectus 
femoris may control the desired direction of the 
external force on the pedal. Using the same argu- 
ments, the often described co-activation of knee 
extensors and hamstrings is logical in light of the 
changing direction of the external force during the 
downstroke. As illustrated in Fig. 8b hamstring ac- 
tivity will decrease the net extending moment in the 
knee and increase the net hip extending moment, 
which indeed appears to occur in the second part of 
the downstroke (Fig. 1). Such a shift is necessary in 
order to direct the force more backwards in the 
course of the downstroke (Fig. 2). Since the ham- 
string appears to shorten during the simultaneous 
extension of hip and knee (Fig. 4), eccentric contrac- 
tions are avoided to a large extent in the powerful 
downstroke. No eccentric contractions of mono- 
articular knee flexors are necessary, while the mono- 
articular knee extensors can contribute to external 
power. If the phase shift between activity level and 
mechanical response of the muscles is taken into 
account (Fig. 4), the simultaneous decrease in rectus 
femoris activity and increase in hamstring activity 
appear to be in concert with the required relative 
change in net moments in hip and knee. 
Moreover, the mono-articular gluteus maximus, 
vasti and soleus appear to participate in the phases 
when they are in a position to contribute to positive 
work, while their mechanical output (muscle mechan- 

--- Page 7 ---

204 G.~.v AN INGENSCHENAL. PI ui. 
a 
Fig. 6. The control of the indicated direction of the external 
force (F,) requires a knee flexing moment (Mr). However, if 
F, does work on the environment {e.g. on the pedal in 
cycling), the knee is extended. The extension of the knee can 
only contribute to the required external work if the knee 
is extended by a (net) extending moment (M,). Such a 
moment, however, would change the direction of the exter- 
nal force. This means that the task demands as outlined in 
this figure lead to conflicting requirements with respect to 
the control of the direction of the force and the control of 
the displa~ment of the Foot in the direction of the force. 
ical response, Fig. 4) seems to have no relationship to 
the required net moments in the joints. 
The work done by these muscles is said to be 
 transported through the tendinous action of bi- 
articular muscles :27 to the joints where it can be used 
most effectively. This transport mechanism can be 
explained with the help of the definition of joint work 
or joint power. In Fig. 8b, for example, the action of 
the hamstrings leads to a decrease of the net moment 
in the knee and an increase of the net moment in 
the hip regardless of the type of contraction of 
the hamstrings (concentric, eccentric or isometric). 
With given joint angular velocities, this leads to an 
increase of hip joint power and a decrease of knee 
joint power (even to slightly negative values; see knee 
joint power in Fig. I at approximately 150 ). Now the 
power delivered by the mono-articular knee extensors 
appears computational Iy as hip joint power. At the 
onset of the downstroke this transport takes place 
in the opposite direction through co-activation of 
the gluteus maximus and rectus femoris. This co- 
activation of mono-articular agonists and their bi- articular antagonists can thus be judged as highly 
functional actions aimed at an optimal utilization of 
the work capacity of the mono-articular muscles 
irrespectively of the required distribution of net joint 
moments. 
A general organizational principle? 
The often independent and sometimes even conf- 
icting requirements to control the direction of an 
external force as well as the changes in joint positions, 
as described here for cycling, obviously reflect a 
constraint which is present in many multi-joint move- 
ments. This constraint is a result of the necessity to 
realize translations of distal segments (or of the body 
centre of gravity relative to the ground) by transform- 
ations of joint rotations into the desired trans- 
lations. For cycling the requirements seem to be met 
through specific inte~uscular coordination between 
mono- and bi-articular muscles. Mono-articular 
muscles seem to be activated so that they deliver force 
when they can contribute to positive work, while 
bi-articular muscles are activated to achieve the dis- 
tribution of net moments over the joints necessary to 
control the direction of the external force. Although 
many more constraints will have influenced the 
activity patterns presented in Fig. 3 (e.g. need for 
joint stability: movements in other planes), it is 
tempting to speculate that the cycling results might 
point at a general organizational principle that the 
activation of mono- and bi-articular muscles is based 
on different processes. Although not investigated in 
the light of the discussed constraints, there seems 
to be some evidence in the literature which might 
Fig. 7. In arm tasks the same type of conflict can exist as 
indicated for the leg extension in Fig. 5. If an object has to 
be displaced in the indicated direction, the control of the 
force on the object requires a flexing moment in the elbow 
(solid arrow). The task, however, requires an extension 
of the elbow joint. If this extension were to contribute 
to external work, one would need an extending moment 
(open arrow). 

--- Page 8 ---

The control of force and position 205 
(b) 
gluteus 
l Tl OXlrn U5 
Fig. 8. Bi-articular muscles appear to efficiently solve the conflict outlined in Fig. 6. They assure the 
required distribution of the net moments over the joints necessary to control the direction of the external 
force on the pedal and transport the work done by concentrically contracting mono-articular muscles to 
the joint where it can contribute to external work. 
support this hypothesis, especially if the necessary 
sources of sensory information are taken into 
account. In order to control the mono-articular 
muscles as generators of positive work one needs 
mainly muscle length information. This information 
can be obtained from muscle spindles from both 
mono-articular muscles that are actively or passively 
stretched45 and from even rapidly shortening active 
muscles.6~9~3 ~3 b Much more information is necessary 
for the control of bi-articular muscles, since their 
distribution of net moments over the joints depends 
on the specific task. From reflexologic studies it is 
known that the alpha motoneuron pools, particularly 
those innervating the bi-articular leg muscles, are 
strongly influenced by cutaneous afferents from the 
sole of the foot.2,33,38 This may support the idea that 
the control of these muscles would be based on 
information concerning the direction of the external 
force exerted by the foot. Some additional support 
for the above-mentioned hypothesis can be deduced 
from other movements. Jongen29 describes activation 
patterns of arm muscles in tasks comparable to the 
one illustrated in Fig. 7. From this work it can be 
deduced that in the task of Fig. 7 the subjects do not 
appear to activate the mono-articular elbow flexors 
but the bi-articular part of the biceps to achieve the 
required net flexing moment while the mono-articular 
part of the triceps actively contributes to external 
work. Recently, we found the same coordination 
between mono- and bi-articular muscles as for cycling in other similar types of arm tasks; the 
mono-articular muscles predominantly being acti- 
vated if they are in the position to shorten.16 
From studies of cats walking, runnihg and jumping 
it can further be concluded that in these activities 
mono-articular hindlimb muscles act mainly as 
simple force or work generators while bi-articular 
muscles show a considerably more complicated task 
dependent behaviour.23,24,37,4,4 The vigour of the task 
Seems to be controlled by firing rate coding in all 
active motor units of mono- and bi-articular 
muscles.22m24. 
Clearly, the proposed distinction of mono- and 
bi-articular muscles is a global one. Bi-articular 
muscles will have more roles than those illustrated in 
this and previousss2 studies. It has been shown in 
various laboratories that bi-articular muscles are 
composed of motor units with entirely different 
functions.23,24,42,47 Hoffer et a1.23*24 showed that the 
bi-articular sartorius of the cat is innervated by 
task-dependent groups of motoneurons that can be 
activated independently. With respect to cycling it 
can be speculated that parts of the bi-articular 
muscles may be activated if these muscles can contrib- 
ute to positive work. This might explain the phase of 
co-activation of the rectus femoris and hamstrings. 
As indicated by Lombard32 the moment arm of the 
rectus femoris is larger at the knee than at the hip 
while the opposite is true for the hamstrings. This 
means that these muscles can simultaneously shorten 

--- Page 9 ---

206 G. J. VAN INGEN SCHENAU PI ul. 
in a certain phase during the downstroke in cycling 
(Fig. 4). More information on actual muscle lengths 
as a function of knee and hip angle will be necessary, 
however, to calculate the exact phases of lengthening 
and shortening of these muscles. At present there 
seems to be no consensus about the muscle length 
data. especially of the hamstrings. Hull and 
Hawkins26b approximated the hamstring lengths by 
calculating the shortest distance between its origin 
and insertion and found periods of shortening during 
cycling which are approximately 70- to the right of 
the patterns shown in Fig. 4 (which are based on 
models derived from cadaver measurements). These 
different results, however, do not affect the reasoning 
used in the present study. Moreover, it will be clear 
that in simultaneous extensions of hip and knee, 
as occurs during the downstroke in cycling, the 
bi-articular hamstrings and rectus femoris will hardly 
contract eccentrically. However, in general it is not 
likely that eccentric contractions can be completely 
avoided through the actions of bi-articular muscles. 
With respect to the actions of mono-articular 
muscles it should be noted that the observed relation- 
ship between the periods of shortening and muscle 
mechanical response (Fig. 4) can be realized in cycling 
due to the saddle. In walking, running and jumping 
the mono-articular extensors are also activated to resist the influence of gravity. This observation. how- 
ever, does not argue against the hypothesized role of 
these muscles as actuators primarily responsible for 
the generation of force or work. Although there 
is some evidence that eccentric and concentric 
contractions may be controlled by different groups 
of motoneurons,33.34a the information necessary to 
control such actions is basically muscle length 
information. 
CONCLUSION 
It is concluded that many multi-joint movements 
require a control of both the distribution of net 
moments and the displacements in the joints. This 
identified constraint is not accounted for by present 
theories on the motor control such as the equilibrium 
point hypotheses7, 4.2s,2 d,43a which are focused on the 
required joint (or hand) position only. Clearly, the 
hypothesis concerning possible differences in the 
control of mono- and bi-articular muscles as out- 
lined here will need considerably more experimental 
evidence before it can serve as a basis for alternative 
theories. 
Acknow[edgemenr-The authors gratefully acknowledge the 
helpful advice of Dr J. J. de Koning. 
Andrews J. G. (1987) The functional roles of the hamstrings and quadriceps during cycling: Lombards paradox 
revisited. J. Biomech. 20, 5655575. 
Aniss A. M., Gandevia S. C. and Burke D. (1988) Reflex changes in muscle spindle discharge during a voluntary 
contraction. J. Neurophysiol. 59, 908920. 
Asatryan D. G. and Feldman A. G. (1965) Functional tuning of the nervous system with control of movement or 
maintenance of a steady posture I. Mechanographic analysis of the work of the joint on the execution of a postural 
task. Biophysics 10, 925-935. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. Baratta R., Solomonow M., Zhou B. H., Letson D., Chuinard R. and D Ambrosia R. (1988) Muscular coactivation: 
the role of the antagonist musculature in maintaining knee stability. Am. J. Sports Med. 16, 113-122. 
Bernstein N. A. (1967) The Coordination and Regulation of Movements. Pergamon Press, London. 
Bessou P., Gabelguen J. M., Joffroy M., Montoya R. and Pages B. (1986) Efferent and afferent activity in a 
gastrocnemius nerve branch during locomotion of the thalamic cat. Expl Bruin Res. 64, 5533568. 
Bizzi E., Chapple W. and Hogan N. (1982) Mechanical properties of muscles. Implications for motor control. Trends 
Neurosci. 5, 395398. 
8. 
9. Bobbert M. F. and van Ingen Schenau G. J. (1988) Coordination in vertical jumping. J. Biomech. 21, 2499262. 
Burke D., Hagbarth K. E. and Lofstedt L. (1978) Muscle spindle activity in man during shortening and lengthening 
contractions. J. Physiol. 271, 131-142. 
10. Dempster W. (1955) Space requirements of the seated operator. USAF, WALK , Technical Reporr 55-159. Wright 
Patterson Air Force Base, OH. 
Il. 
12. 
13. 
14. Elftman H. (1939a) Forces and energy changes in the leg during walking. Am. J. Physioi. 125, 339-356. 
Elftman H. (1939b) The function of muscles in locomotion. Am. J. Physiol. 125, 3577366. 
Ericson M. O., Bratt A., Nisell R., Arborelius U. P. and Ekholm J. (1986) Power output and work in different muscle 
groups during ergometer cycling. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 55, 229-235. 
Feldman A. G. (1986) Once more on the equilibrium point-hypothesis (I-model) for motor control. J. Motor Behac. 
18, 17-54. 
15. Fick A. E. (1879) Ueber zweigelenckige Muskeln. Archiv. Anafomie Entwicklungsgeschichte 3, 201-239. 
16. Frigo C. and Pedotti A. (1978) Determination of muscle length during locomotion. Biomechanics VI-A (eds Asmussen 
E. and Jorgensen K.), pp. 310-316. University Park Press, Baltimore. 
16a. Gielen C. C. A. M.. van Inaen Schenau G. J., Tax A. A. M. and Theeuwen M. (1990) The activation of mono- 
and bi-articular muscles in multi-joint movements. In Multiple Muscle Systems (eds Winter J. and Woo S. L. Y.), 
pp. 302-311. Pergamon Press, New York. REFERENCES 
17. Gregoire L., Veeger H. E., Huijing P. A. and van lngen Schenau G. J. (1984) The role of mono- and bi-articular muscles 
in explosive movements. Inf. J. Sports Med. 5, 301-305. 
18. Gregor R. J., Green D. and Garhammer J. J. (1982) An electromyographic analysis of selected muscle activity in elite 
competitive cyclists. Biomechanics VII-B (eds Morecki A., Fidelus K., Kedzior K. and Wit A.), pp. 537-541. University 
Park Press, Baltimore. 

--- Page 10 ---

The control of force and position 207 
19. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
23. 
24. 
25. Gregor R. J., Cavanagh P. R. and Lafortune M. (1985) Knee flexor moments during propulsion in cycling-a creative 
solution to Lombard s Paradox. J. Biomech. 18, 307-316. 
Grieve D. W., Pheasant S. and Cavanagh P. R. (1978) Prediction of gastrocnemius length from knee and ankle joint 
posture. Biomechanics VI-A (eds Asmussen E. and Jorgensen K.), pp. 405412. University Park Press, Baltimore. 
Hamley E. J. and Thomas V. (1968) Physiological and postural factors in the calibration of the bicycle ergometer. 
J. Physiol. 191, 55-57. 
Hoffer J. A., O Donovan M. J., Pratt C. A. and Loeb G. E. (1981) Discharge patterns of hindlimb motoneurons during 
normal cat locomotion. Science 213, 466468. 
Hoffer J. A.. Sueano N.. Loeb G. E.. Marks W. B.. D Donovan M. J. and Pratt C. A. (1987) Cat hindlimb motoneurons 
during 1ocomot Ton II. Normal activity patterns. i. Neurophysiol. 57, 53&553. 
Hoffer J. A., Loeb G. E., Sugano N., Marks W. B., O Donovan M. J. and Pratt C. A. (1987) Cat hindlimb motoneurons 
during locomotion III. Functional segregation in sartorius. J. Neurophysiol. 57, 554-562. 
Hogan N. (1985) The mechanics of multi-joint posture and movement control. Biol. Cybern. 52, 315331. 
26a. Hogan N. (1984) An organizing principle for a class of voluntary movements. J. Neurosci. 4, 2745-2754. 
26b. Hull M. L. and Hawkins D. A. (1990) Analysis of muscular work in multisegmental movement: application to cycling. 
In Multiple Muscle Systems (eds Winters J. M. and Woo S. L. Y.), pp. 621638. Springer, New York. 
27. van Ingen Schenau G. J., Bobbert M. F. and Rozendal R. H. (1987) The unique action of bi-articular muscles in 
complex movements. J. Anat. 155, l-5. 
28. van Ingen Schenau G. J. (1989) From rotation to translation: implications for theories of motor control. Hum. mvr 
Sci. 8, 42342. 
29. Jongen H. (1989) Theories and Experiments on Muscle Coordination during Isometric Contractions. Thesis. Rijksuniver- 
siteit, Utrecht. 
30. Jorge M. and Hull M. L. (1986) Analysis of EMG measurements during bicycle pedalling. J. Biomech. 19, 317-329. 
31a. Loeb G. E. (1981) Somatosensory unit input to the spinal cord during normal walking. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmac. 
59, 627-635. 
3 1 b. Loeb G. E. (I 984) The control and responses of mammalian muscles spindles during normally executed motor tasks, 
Exercise and Sport Sciences Reviews (ed. Terjung R. L.), Vol. 12, pp. 1577204. 
32. Lombard W. P. (1903) The action of two-joint muscles. Am. Physiol. Educ. Rev. 8, 141-145. 
33. Nardone A. and Schieppati M. (1988) Shift of activity from slow to fast muscle during voluntary lengthening 
contractions of the triceps surae muscles in humans. J. khysiol. 395, 363-381. . - - 
34a. Nardone A., Roman0 C. and Schieppati M. (1989) Selective recruitment of high-threshold human motor units during 
voluntary isotonic lengthening of active muscles. J. Physiol. 409, 451471. 
34b. Nemeth C. and Ohlsen N. (1985) In uivo moment arm lengths for hip extensor muscles at different angles of hip flexion. 
35. 
36. 
37. 
38. 
39. 
40. 
41. J. Biomech. 18, 129-140. 
Nordeen-Snyder K. S. (1977) The effect of bicycle seat height variation upon oxygen consumption and lower limb 
kinematics. Med. Sci. Sporfs 2, 113-l 17. 
Olney S. and Winter D. A. (1985) Prediction of knee and ankle moments of force in walking from EMG and kinematic 
data. J. Biomech. 18, 9-20. 
Perret C. and Gabelguen J. M. (1980) Main characteristics of the hindlimb locomotor cycle in the decorticate cat with 
special reference to bi-functional muscles. Brain Res. 187, 333-352. 
Pierrot-Deseilligny E., Bergego C., Katz R. and Morin C. (1981) Cutaneous depression of Ib Reflex pathways to 
motoneurones in man. Expl Brain Res. 42, 351-361. 
Redfield R. and Hull M. L. (1986) On the relation between joint moments and pedalling rates at constant power in 
bicycling. J. Biomech. 19, 317-329. 
Spector S. A., Gardiner P. F., Zernicke R. F., Rog R. R. and Edgerton V. R. (1980) Muscle architecture and 
force-velocity characteristics of cat soleus and medial gastrocnemius: implications for motor control. J. Neurophysiol. 
44, 95 l-960. 
Suzuki S., Watanabe S. and Saburo H. (1982) EMG activity and kinematics of human cycling movements at different _ 
44. 
45. 
46. 
47. 43b. Visser J. J., Hoogkamer J. E., Bobbert M. F. and Huying P. A. (1990) Length and moment arm of human leg muscles 
as a function of knee and hip joint angles. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 61, 451460. 
43~. Vos E. J., Mullender M. G. and van Ingen Schenau G. J. (1990) Electromechanical delay in vastus lateralis muscle 
during isometric contractions. Eur. J. Appl. Physiol. 60, 467471. 
Walmsley B., Hodgson J. A. and Burke R. E. (1978) Forces produced by medial gastrocnemius and soleus muscles 
during locomotion in freely moving cats. J. Neurophysiol. 41, 1203-1216. 
Wei J. Y., Simon J., Randic M. and Burgess P. R. (1986) Joint angle signaling by muscle spindle receptors. Brain Res. 
370, 108-l 18. 
Winter D. A. (1984) Kinematic and kinetic patterns in human gait: variability and compensating effects. Hum. mvt Sci. 
3, 51-76. 
van Zuylen E. J., Gielen C. C. A. M. and Denier van der Gon J. J. (1988) Coordination and inhomogeneous activation 
of human arm muscles during isometric torques. J. Neurophysiol. 60, 1523-1548. constant velocities. Brain Res. 240, 245-258. 
42. Ter Haar Romeny B. M., Denier van der Gon J. J. and Gielen C. C. A. M. (1984). Relation of the location of a motor 
unit in human biceps muscle and its critical firing levels for different tasks. Expl Neurol. 85, 631650. 
43a. Vincken H. M. and Denier van der Gon J. J. (1985) Stiffness as a control variable in motor performance. Hum. mvt 
Sci. 4, 307-3 19. 
(Accepted 16 July 1991) 

--- Page 11 ---

================================================================================
Total Files: 4
Total Tokens: 32441


=== END OF CONTEXT UPLOAD ===